---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/deploy-your-flask-application-using-uwsgi"
slug: "deploy-your-flask-application-using-uwsgi"
title: "Set up and deploy your very own Flask web application on Hetzner as systemctl service with Nginx"
date: 2024-12-09
short_description: "By following this tutorial you should be able to host your own Python Flask backend."
tags: ["Flask", "Python", "Ubuntu", "Development", "Hosting"]
author: "https://github.com/djpanther78"
author_img: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/142619211?s=400&u=76efda26b21b3f0d9172e2f432d23e82cb66fdfd&v=4"
author_description: "I like Panthers"
language: "en"
header_img: "header-3"
...
---


### Set up and deploy your very own Flask web application on your sever as a systemctl service with Nginx

# Introduction

Hello,

Welcome to this guide on how to install and deploy your very own Flask web application. For this example I will be using Ubuntu Server and Python 3.12. This has been tested on Python 3.12, it might work on older versions too.


# Prerequisites:

- A domain - to host your backend on

- A server - to run/host your backend

- Some basic knowledge of Linux commands

# Step 1: Set up your domain

We first have to point our DNS records to our server, this is because we want to have the Flask backend hosted on our domain. You can do this by following these steps:

1. Go to your DNS provider 

2. Create a new A record

3. Set the name to @

4. Put your server IP in the value

5. Save it

6. Wait 24 hours for the DNS to propagate


Now that you domain is good to go, we can move on with the tutorial.


# Step 2: Creating your Python code


If you don't already have a Flask Python script you can create one, for this tutorial we will use a basic script that tells you *"hello world"* and *"Hi"* Here is the code we will use and deploy:


```
# Import the modules
from flask import Flask

# Setting the app variable
app = Flask(__name__)

# Creating our "homepage"
@app.route("/")
def hello_world():
    return "Hello, World!"

# Creating our hello-world route
@app.route("/some-route")
def say_hi():
    return "Hi"

# Setting the run command
if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=5000)
``` 

# Step 3: Install Python (if needed)
To start we first need to install Python if this is not already done. Usually Python is pre-installed on Ubuntu.
You can check this by doing python3 --version. If you see output containing a version with 3.12.x means you are good to go and you can now move on to step 4.

If you do not see any output you can install Python by following these commands:

1. `sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa` - this will add the Python repository

2. `sudo apt update` - this will update your package list

3. `sudo apt install python3.12` - this will install Python from the repository

# Step 4: Creating and setting up our working directory

Then we are going to create a directory and a virtual environment. In this case we will use /home/youruser/flaskbackend.

1. `mkdir ~/flaskbackend` - this will create a directory in /home/youruser

2. `cd ~/flaskbackend` - this will move you into the created directory

3. `python3 -m venv venv` - this will create a Python virtual environment. Doing this without a venv can kill your system.

4. `source venv/bin/activate` - this will activate the virtual environment

Now you should see (venv) before your name. This means that your venv (virtual environment) is sucessfully activated. We can now move on with installing the required Python packages.

1. `pip install flask` - this will install Flask for Python

2. `pip install uWSGI` - this will install uWSGi for Python, uWSGI is the WSGI server we will use to deploy the backend

Now we are going to create the application/Python file. For this you can use your favorite text editor. For this tutorial we are going to use Nano. 

1. `nano app.py` - this will create app.py and open a text editor

2. Paste your flask code in there

# Step 5: Testing the Flask application

Now we are going to test if your file works. In this example case you can do the following.

1. `python3 app.py` - this will start your backend in development mode

**This should say:**
```
* Serving Flask app 'app'
* Debug mode: on
WARNING: This is a development server. Do not use it in a production deployment. Use a production WSGI server instead.
* Running on http://yourhost:5000
Press CTRL+C to quit
Restarting with stat
* Debugger is active!
* Debugger PIN: 351-930-704
```

2. Now you can go to yourserverip:5000 and see if your web application is there. if yes we can move on.

# Step 6: Test if uWSGI works

1. `nano wsgi.py` - this will create uwsgi.py and open a text editor, creating wsgi.py will tell uWSGI what to do

2. Paste:

```
from app import app

if __name__ == "__main__":
    app.run()
```    
Now we are going to test if uWSGI can actually serve the application. 

1. `uwsgi --socket 0.0.0.0:yourport --protocol=http --processes=2 -w wsgi:app` - change yourport to the port you want to have it on

2. Now (again) go to serverip:yourport

3. See if you can see the standard backend page, if yes we can move on

4. Type `deactivate` - this will make you exit the venv

# Step 7: Set up a systemctl service for our flask backend

1. `sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/flaskbackend.service` - this will create the service file, a service file tells your system what your application is and what it needs to do

2. Paste:

```
[Unit]
Description=A uWSGI instance to serve the Flask backend
After=network.target


[Service]
User=youruser
Group=www-data
WorkingDirectory=/home/youruser/flaskbackend
Environment="PATH=/home/youruser/flaskbackend/venv/bin"
ExecStart=/home/youruser/flaskbackend/venv/bin/uwsgi --socket /home/youruser/flaskbackend/flaskbackend.sock --module wsgi:app --master --processes numberofprocesses --chmod-socket=660 --vacuum --py-autoreload 1


[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

3. Change the following things:

Youruser ➔ to your username

Yourport ➔ to the wanted port

Numberofprocesses ➔ to the number of processes you want to have

4. `sudo systemctl daemon-reload` - this will reload the service files

5. `sudo systemctl start flaskbackend` - this will start your backend

6. `sudo systemctl enable flaskbackend` - this will tell your system to start the Flask backend at boot

7. `sudo systemctl status flaskbackend` - this checks the status of your running backend, it should look like this:

```
● flaskbackend.service - A uWSGI instance to serve the Flask backend
     Loaded: loaded (/etc/systemd/system/flaskbackend.service; enabled; preset: enabled)
     Active: active (running) since Sat 2024-11-23 20:32:32 CET; 2 weeks 1 day ago
   Main PID: 1547894 (uwsgi)
      Tasks: 82 (limit: 38366)
     Memory: 307.1M (peak: 1.1G)
        CPU: 2d 2h 7min 35.756s
     CGroup: /system.slice/flaskbackend.service
             ├─1547894 /home/youruser/flaskbackend/venv/bin/uwsgi --socket /home/youruser/flaskbackend/flaskbackend.sock --module wsgi:app --master --processes numberofprocesses --chmod-socket=660 --vacuum --py-autoreload 1
             ├─1548580 /home/youruser/flaskbackend/venv/bin/uwsgi --socket /home/youruser/flaskbackend/flaskbackend.sock --module wsgi:app --master --processes numberofprocesses --chmod-socket=660 --vacuum --py-autoreload 1
```             

# Step 8: Set up Nginx


Now this is running, we are going to setup a Nginx proxy.

1. `sudo apt update` - this will update your packages

2. `sudo apt install nginx` - this will install Nginx

3. `sudo systemctl start nginx` - this will start Nginx

4. `sudo systemctl enable nginx` - this will start Nginx at boot 

5. `sudo unlink /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/default` - this will remove the standard Nginx site

6. `sudo nano /etc/nginx/sites-available/flaskbackend`- this will create the Nginx configuration file

7. Paste:

```
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name yourdomain.extension www.yourdomain.extension;

    location / {
        include uwsgi_params;
        uwsgi_pass unix:/home/youruser/flaskbackend/flaskbackend.sock;
    }
}
```

8. `sudo ln -s /etc/nginx/sites-available/flaskbackend /etc/nginx/sites-enabled` - this will create a symbolic link to /etc/nginx/sites-enabled (where the enabled sites are located). If you update the file in /etc/nginx/sites-enabled the changes will be automatically reflected in /etc/nginx/sites-available

9. `sudo nginx -t` - this should say:

```
nginx: the configuration file /etc/nginx/nginx.conf syntax is ok
nginx: configuration file /etc/nginx/nginx.conf test is successful
```

10. `sudo ufw delete allow 5000` - this will remove the UFW entry for port 5000 we added earlier

11. `sudo ufw allow 'Nginx full'` - this will allow Nginx to do what it needs to do

13. `systemctl restart nginx` - this will restart Nginx

13. Now go to http://yourdomain.extension and you should see your web application

***You actually need to replace yourdomain.extension with your actual domain and its extension!***


# Step 9: Set up a SSL certificate using Certbot


Now that this is all set up we are going to secure the web application with a SSL certificate using Certbot

1. `sudo apt update` - this will update your list of packages

2. `sudo apt install python3-certbot-nginx` - this will install Certbot for Nginx

3. `sudo certbot --nginx -d yourdomain.extension -d www.yourdomain.extension` - change yourdomain.extension to yourdomain.extension, this will request a SSL certificate for www.yourdomain.extension and yourdomain.extension

4. Now answer the questions and you should have installed your certificate

5. Now you can go to https://yourdomain.extension and see your Flask web application

# Outro

That's it! You have now done the following things:

- [x] Installed Python on your Ubuntu system
- [x] Installed uWSGI and Flask in your venv
- [x] Created a Nginx reverse proxy
- [x] Set up a working SSL certificate

I hope this guide has helped you. Thanks for following along!