---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/how-to-install-node-js-on-ubuntu-22-04"
slug: "how-to-install-node-js-on-ubuntu-22-04"
date: "2022-12-29"
title: "How To Install Node.js on Ubuntu 22.04"
short_description: "In this guide, we will show you three different ways of getting Node.js installed on an Ubuntu 20.04 server: using apt to install the nodejs package from Ubuntu's default software repository, using apt with an alternate PPA software repository to install specific versions of the nodejs package, and installing the Node Version Manager and using it to install and manage multiple versions of Node.js"
tags: ["Development", "NodeJs", "Lang:JS"]
author: "Nischay Sharma"
author_link: "https://github.com/nischay876
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/84630660
author_description: "I am a developer living in india, i like to make tech related blogs"
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-5"
cta: "dedicated"
---

## Introduction

[Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) is a JavaScript runtime for server-side programming. It allows developers to create scalable backend functionality using JavaScript, a language many are already familiar with from browser-based web development.

In this guide, we will show you three different ways of getting Node.js installed on an Ubuntu 20.04 server:

using apt to install the nodejs package from Ubuntu’s default software repository
using apt with an alternate PPA software repository to install specific versions of the nodejs package
installing nvm, the Node Version Manager, and using it to install and manage multiple versions of Node.js
For many users, using apt with the default repo will be sufficient. If you need specific newer (or legacy) versions of Node, you should use the PPA repository. If you are actively developing Node applications and need to switch between node versions frequently, choose the nvm method.

**Prerequisites**

This guide assumes that you are using Ubuntu 22.04. Before you begin, you should have a non-root user account with sudo privileges set up on your system. 
## Option 1 - `Installing Node.js with Apt from the Default Repositories`c

Ubuntu 22.04 contains a version of Node.js in its default repositories that can be used to provide a consistent experience across multiple systems. At the time of writing, the version in the repositories is 10.19. This will not be the latest version, but it should be stable and sufficient for quick experimentation with the language.

Warning: the version of Node.js included with Ubuntu 20.04, version 10.19, is now unsupported and unmaintained. You should not use this version in production, and should refer to one of the other sections in this tutorial to install a more recent version of Node.

### Step 1 - `Installing Node.js with Apt from the Default Repositories`

To get this version, you can use the apt package manager. Refresh your local package index first by typing:
```bash
sudo apt update
```

Then install Node.js:
```bash
sudo apt install nodejs
```

Check that the install was successful by querying `node` for its version number:
```
node -v
```
```
Output
v10.x.x
```
### Step 2 - `Installing NPM with Apt from the Default Repositories`

If the package in the repositories suits your needs, this is all you need to do to get set up with Node.js. In most cases, you’ll also want to also install npm, the Node.js package manager. You can do this by installing the npm package with apt:
```
sudo apt install npm
```

This will allow you to install modules and packages to use with Node.js.
At this point you have successfully installed Node.js and npm using apt and the default Ubuntu software repositories. The next section will show how to use an alternate repository to install different versions of Node.js.

## Option 2 - `Installing Node.js with Apt Using a NodeSource PPA`c
### Step 1 - `Using a NodeSource PPA`

To install a different version of Node.js, you can use a PPA (personal package archive) maintained by NodeSource. These PPAs have more versions of Node.js available than the official Ubuntu repositories. Node.js v12, v14, and v16 are available as of the time of writing.

First, we will install the PPA in order to get access to its packages. From your home directory, use curl to retrieve the installation script for your preferred version, making sure to replace 16.x with your preferred version string (if different).
```
curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_19.x | sudo -E bash - &&\
sudo apt-get install -y nodejs
```

Verify that you’ve installed the new version by running node with the -v version flag:
```
node -v
```
```
Output
v19.x.x
```
The NodeSource nodejs package contains both the node binary and npm, so you don’t need to install npm separately.

At this point you have successfully installed Node.js and npm using apt and the NodeSource PPA. The next section will show how to use the Node Version Manager to install and manage multiple versions of Node.js.


## Conclusion

There are a quite a few ways to get up and running with Node.js on your Ubuntu 20.04 server. Your circumstances will dictate which of the above methods is best for your needs. While using the packaged version in Ubuntu’s repository is the easiest method, using nvm or a NodeSource PPA offers additional flexibility.

##### License: MIT

<!--

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: nischay876@gmail.com

-->
