---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/game-server-with-amp"
slug: "game-server-with-amp"
date: "2019-03-17"
title: "Setting up a Game server with AMP"
short_description: "In this tutorial we are going to setup a game server with AMP."
tags: ["Gaming", "Webinterface"]
author: "ntimo"
author_link: "https://github.com/ntimo"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/6145026"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en", "ru"]
header_img: ""
cta: "dedicated"
---


## Introduction

In this tutorial we will setup a game server control panel called [AMP](https://cubecoders.com/AMP). With this panel we can host game servers for multiple games like Minecraft, Terraria, ARK and many more.

**Prerequisites**

* You will need an AMP license. A license can be bought [here](https://cubecoders.com/AMP).

## Step 1 - Create a new Cloud server

* Login to your cloud dashboard from [https://console.hetzner.cloud]
* Create new project and name it whatever you want
* Choose your server location - it's up to you
* Click `Add Server` and select `Ubuntu 18.04` from Image
* Choose the resources you need from Type
* Click on the field `User Data` enter this `#include https://get.docker.com` (this will install docker)
* Select your SSH-Key
    * You can read [this](https://help.github.com/en/enterprise/2.16/user/articles/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent) article to know how to generate SSH key
* Write your server hostname in `name` input
* Click `Create & Buy Now`

## Step 2 - Install updates on the server (Optional)

Wait a few seconds for the server to startup and then connect to it using SSH and your private key.
Now you should install available updates on your server by running:  

`apt update && apt upgrade -y`  

## Step 3 - Install Java (for Minecraft servers)

If you want to run a Minecraft server you will need to install java. You can do so by executing:  
`apt install -y openjdk-8-jre`

## Step 4 - Install AMP

Now you want to install AMP. In order to do so execute:  
`curl -sSL https://cubecoders.com/getamp.sh | bash`  

This will setup AMP.
You are going to be asked to choose a password for the `amp` user that AMP will run under. Please choose a secure password.
Directly after that you will need to choose a username and password for the AMP ADS instance (a web portal to create new instances - every game has its own instance). Once this is done simply press y when asked if you want to install some packages needed for AMP.

## Step 5 - Connect to the panel

Now its time to open your browser and go to `http://10.0.0.1:8080`. There you can login with the user and password you just choose. Directly after your login AMP will ask you for its `Operation Mode`. Since this is a single server installation choose `Standalone (Default)`. Then enter your license key. Once entered press the big green `Restart AMP` button.

## Step 6 - Create a game server instance

First click on `Create Instance`. Then in the `Application` drop down select the game server you want (for example Minecraft Java Edition). In the field `Friendly Name (Optional)` you can give the server a name. This is optional but can be nice. Please do not check the checkbox `Create as standalone (Not managed by ADS)` because this will make it impossible to manage the instance via the ADS webinterface.

## Step 7 - Connect to the instance

You should now see a new instance in the `local instances` block. It should have the colour red, click onto it and then select `Start Instance`. Now when you click on the `Manage` button you will see the AMP interface for that instance and be able to manage it.

## Step 8 - Make AMP start at boot

In order to make AMP start at boot you will have to add a cronjob. Type `crontab -e` and then choose a editor for example `nano`. Scroll down to the bottom and add `@reboot /opt/cubecoders/amp/ampinstmgr -b` to the file. You can exit and save by pressing `control+x`. If you are asked if want to save press enter to confirm.

## Step 9 - Upgrade AMP

Sometimes a new AMP version gets released. In order to upgrade AMP to  the latest version, simply run `ampinstmgr upgradeall`.

## Conclusion

You can now use the AMP webinterface to create new instances of your favorite game server. This way you can not only create a new game server in no time at all, but also make the administration of these servers very easy.  

##### License: MIT

<!---
Contributors's Certificate of Origin
By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:
(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or
(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or
(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.
(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.
Signed-off-by: 0mfhniozkb9s4q7e6ap8yvlt@nowitzki.me
-->
