## Introduction

In this tutorial I will guide you on setting up Proxmox in a Hetzner Cloud instance. Even if we can´t (till now) use KVM, as nesting is not supported/enabled, we can still benefit using LXC containers.
At the end of this tutorial, we will be able to deploy LXC containers, which can communicate to the outside world, and even have ports redirected to them.

I will, in the near future, expand this tutorial with the following (optional) steps:
- "Routing-VM with HAProxy", so we can host multiple containers with webservers (even with HTTPS!)
- Clustering with multiple instances

**Prerequisites**
- Hetzner Cloud instance
- All commands provided can be run either via SSH, or by using the WebUI-Shell

## Step 1 - `Install Proxmox VE`

At the time of writing, only the ISO for Proxmox VE 6.4 is available - either, you request to be provided the current Proxmox VE 7.0.2 ISO via ticket, or you run a manual upgrade afterwards: 
https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Upgrade_from_6.x_to_7.0

I will not cover the installation itself, as this is perfectly documented by Proxmox:
https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Installation

The only point to keep in mind is, do you want to use the included Proxmox VE storage replication framework (https://pve.proxmox.com/pve-docs/chapter-pvesr.html)?

If this is the case, and you don´t want/need an additional Cloud Volume, you have to choose zfs (RAID0) during installation.

`Note: Clustering will be added in the near future`

After the installation completed, don´t forget to unmount the ISO again.

## Step 2 - `Repository configuration (optional)`

If you have no license and want to leave it that way, you will need to adapt the repository configuration.
For this, we disable the `pve-enterprise` and activate the `pve-no-subscription` repositories.

```bash
sed -i 's/^deb/#deb/g' /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pve-enterprise.list
echo "deb [arch=amd64] http://download.proxmox.com/debian/pve bullseye pve-no-subscription" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pve-install-repo.list
```

## Step 3 - `Network configuration - prerequisites`

In case you want to stick with the default Linux Bridge, there´s nothing to do.
I, however, prefer to use OpenvSwitch.

As a preparation, we make sure we have the most recent package lists available:
```bash
apt update
```

### Step 3.1 - `Install ifupdown2`

To be able to apply our changes on the network configuration via the WebUI, we have to install the ifupdown2 package:
```bash
apt install ifupdown2 -y
```

### Step 3.2 - `Install OpenvSwitch (Optional)`

```bash
apt install openvswitch-switch -y
```

### Step 3.3 - `Remove default Bridge`

As we do, in no way, benefit from the default Bridge, we will remove it.
For this, adapt `/etc/network/interfaces` as below, and save it as `/etc/network/interfaces.new`:
```bash
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

auto ens3
iface ens3 inet static
        address <your.public.ip.address>/32
        gateway 172.31.1.1
        pointopoint 172.31.1.1
        dns-nameservers 213.133.98.98 213.133.99.99 213.133.100.100
        post-up echo 1 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward
        post-up iptables -t nat -F
```

Afterwards, we can activate this change without loosing connectivity via the WebUI.
Select your Host on the left side, and in the menu navigate to `System -> Network`, where you can click on `Apply Configuration`

`post-up echo 1 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward` enables forwarding for packets.
`post-up iptables -t nat -F` flushes all Masquerade/Forwarding rules

## Step 4 - `Network configuration`

This step depends on wether you want to use the basic Linux Bridge, or an OpenvSwitch-Bridge.
You will have to choose a subnet for your containers, and an IP for your Host as Gateway.
For example:
- Subnet: 172.20.1.0/24
- Gateway: 172.20.1.1

Select your Host on the left side, and in the menu navigate to `System -> Network`.

### Step 4.1.a - `Linux Bridge`

Click `Create -> Linux Bridge`, choose a name and fill the desired subnet (by using the Gateway-IP) for your containers:
`172.20.1.1/24`
Leave all other fields on their default values.

### Step 4.1.b - `OpenvSwitch Bridge`

Click `Create -> OVS Bridge` and choose a name (e.g. `vmbr0`) for the bridge.
Next, click `Create -> OVS IntPort`, choose a meaningful name (e.g. `gw_vmbr0`) and select the Bridge we just created.
Additionally, we also fill the desired subnet (by using the Gateway-IP) for your containers:
`172.20.1.1/24`

### Step 4.2 - `Masquerade`

For our containers to be able to communicate to the outside world, we need to tell our Host to Masquerade them.
To do this, we edit the file `/etc/network/interfaces.new` and search for a line like `iface vmbr0 inet ...`, where vmbr0 is of course our before choosen name.
Either directly below, or after the following intendanted lines, insert the following (intendanted):
```bash
        post-up iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -s '172.20.1.0/24' -o ens3 -j MASQUERADE
```

Of course, you have to replace `172.20.1.0/24`with your desired subnet.

Afterwards, we can activate our changes - select your Host on the left side, and in the menu navigate to `System -> Network`, where you can click on `Apply Configuration`

## Step 5 - `Port forwarding (Optional)`

In case you want to forward a port from your Host to a container, we edit the file `/etc/network/interfaces` and search for our `masquerade`-line.
After it, again intendanted, insert the following:
```bash
        post-up iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i ens3 -p tcp --dport 80 -j DNAT --to 172.20.1.1:8080
```

Of course, adapt this line to your needs (udp instead of tcp, target, ...).

Either directly save the file, and paste the inserted line without `post-up`, or save the file as `/etc/network/interfaces.new` and activate it via the WebUI.

## Step 6 - `Create container`

The process itself is not scope of this tutorial, and any documentation needed should be available here: https://pve.proxmox.com/pve-docs/pve-admin-guide.html#chapter_pct

Keep in mind, when creating a container, to give it an IP from your choosen subnet, and to specify for choosen Gateway IP (see introduction to Step 4)

## Conclusion

We now have a basic setup, on which we can deploy LXC containers. In the near future, as mentioned in the beginning, I will extend this tutorial.

##### License: MIT

<!--

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: Stefan Kachlyr (stefan@kachlyr.at)

-->
