---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/the-access-restriction-by-an-ip-and-password-in-nginx-on-ubuntu"
slug: "the-access-restriction-by-an-ip-and-password-in-nginx-on-ubuntu"
date: "2023-04-12"
title: "Restrict access by an IP or password in nginx"
short_description: "This tutorial explains how to restrict access by an IP or password in nginx. You will also learn how to block users based on their country."
tags: ["nginx", "Ubuntu", "GeoIP2", "IP", "password"]]
author: "wpdevelopment11"
author_link: "https://github.com/wpdevelopment11"
author_img: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/85058595"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-4"
cta: "cloud"
---

## Introduction

In this tutorial you will learn how to restrict access to your website by editing the `server` and `location` blocks in the nginx configuration file. It is explained how to block selected client IP addresses and IP addresses from specific geographical locations (geo-based restriction), and how to restrict access by setting up a pair of username and password (HTTP Basic Authentication). This can be useful if you want to add additional protection for your web server. You will also learn how to restrict access to one web page only (e.g. `https://example.com/admin/`), and leave access to all other web pages on your website (e.g. `https://example.com/`) unrestricted.

**Prerequisites**

* Configured Ubuntu server and a user with sudo privileges (you can follow [this tutorial](https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/howto-initial-setup-ubuntu)).
* Installed nginx (you can follow [this tutorial](https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/how-to-install-nginx-on-ubuntu-20-04)).
* Basic understanding of nginx and its configuration. You can follow the [official tutorial](https://nginx.org/en/docs/beginners_guide.html).
* For the password-based restriction, you should enable HTTPS for your `server`. You can follow [this tutorial](https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/add-ssl-certificate-with-lets-encrypt-to-nginx-on-ubuntu-20-04).

**Example terminology**

* Server IPv4: 10.0.0.1
* Local IPv4: 10.0.0.5
* Domain: example.com

Please replace `10.0.0.5` with an IP of your local computer, `10.0.0.1` with an IP of your server, and `example.com` with your own domain in all example commands.

**Formatting conventions**

* In some configuration examples, the ellipsis `...` is used to indicate that part of the configuration is omitted.

* server vs. `server`

  * server is your Ubuntu server on which nginx is installed.

  * `server`, on the other hand, is the block in the nginx configuration file which looks like this:

    ```nginx
    server {
        ...
    }
    ```

**Configuration places**

You need to know where nginx stores its configuration.

* `/etc/nginx` is the nginx configuration directory. All configuration files are placed there. This directory is used for the relative paths in the `include` directive.

* `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` is the main nginx configuration file. nginx starts reading its configuration here.

* `/etc/nginx/sites-enabled` is the directory where you can place your HTTP(S) `server` configuration files. After nginx is started or reloaded, all files from there will be loaded by nginx. This works because the main file `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` contains the directive `include sites-enabled/*;`. Files are loaded in alphabetical order.

* `/etc/nginx/sites-available` is the directory where you can place your HTTP(S) `server` configuration files, but they will not be loaded by nginx. A configuration file in this directory can be activated by creating a symbolic link in the `/etc/nginx/sites-enabled` directory. For example:

  ```bash
  ln -s /etc/nginx/sites-available/example.com /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/
  ```
  enables the configuration file `example.com`. After the next startup or reload, nginx will load this file.

**Log files**

Log files are useful when you need to troubleshoot something. There are two log files by default:

* `/var/log/nginx/access.log` is the file where nginx logs all requests. The format of this log file is called `combined` and is explained [here](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_log_module.html#log_format).

* `/var/log/nginx/error.log` is the file where nginx logs all error conditions and status information.

**Error on reload**

If you try to reload your configuration with the command `sudo systemctl reload nginx` and nginx
complains that you made a mistake, you can see the precise error by running `sudo nginx -t`.

## Step 1 - Locating the server block file

You need to find the file that includes the `server` block for your domain. You can use `ls -al /etc/nginx/sites-available/` to list the `server` block files that are saved on your server. Let's say you want to add restrictions for a `server` block that responds to:


```bash
curl http://example.com
```

> `example.com` is your domain or the IP of your server

You need to find the `server` block that includes the line `server_name example.com;`.

In our example, the `server` block we are looking for is saved in the file `/etc/nginx/sites-available/example.com` and it looks like this:

```nginx
server {
    ...
    server_name example.com;
    ...
}
```

* For HTTP, the `listen` directive should be `listen 80;` or `listen 10.0.0.1:80;` (`10.0.0.1` should be the IP of your server).
* For HTTPS, the `listen` directive should be `listen 443 ssl;` or `listen 10.0.0.1:443 ssl;`.

For the `curl` example above, the configuration should be similar to this:

```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    ...
}
```

If you can't find a `server` block with the appropriate `server_name` line, it means that the `server` block in the default file (`/etc/nginx/sites-available/default`) is used. In this case, you need to find the `server` block with a `listen` directive that corresponds to the request port that appears first in the nginx configuration, or a `listen` directive that is marked as default, like this: `listen 80 default_server;`.

After the configuration of the `server` is found, you can start adding restrictions to your `server`.

## Step 2 - Using IP addresses of clients to allow or deny access

nginx provides `allow` and `deny` directives to allow and block access for clients by using their IP addresses.
For testing purposes, you can block access to yourself.

Before doing so, you need to first check that you can access your `server` by running this command on your **local computer**:

```bash
curl -4 --head http://example.com
```

> * Replace `example.com` with `server_name` of the `server` you want to configure, and `http` with `https` if necessary.
> 
> * The combination of the domain (or an IP) and port must correspond to the nginx `server_name` and `listen` directive (in this example, port `80` is used because it is the default for HTTP).

You should get the output similar to this, with the HTTP status `200`:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx
Date: Fri, 10 Mar 2023 13:22:45 GMT
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Connection: keep-alive
```

### Step 2.1 - Finding out your public IP address

You need to know the public IP address of your **local computer** to block it in nginx. You can run this command to determine it:

```bash
curl -4 https://2ip.io
```

Your IP address will be outputted to the terminal, for example: `10.0.0.5`.

* If the curl command above doesn't work, try this [Google search query](https://www.google.com/search?q=what+is+my+ip). You should see your public IP right in the search results.

* If nginx is only listening on a local port, you need to use your local IP instead of the public one.

### Step 2.2 - Blocking access

You need to add this line to the appropriate `location` context in your `server` block:

```nginx
deny 10.0.0.5;
```

> Replace `10.0.0.5` with your own public IP. 

The complete configuration may look like this:

```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    location / {
        deny 10.0.0.5;
    }
}
```

To apply your changes, reload the nginx configuration:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

Now, let's try to run the same command from the introduction of this step on your **local computer**:

```bash
curl -4 --head http://example.com
```

This time, the output must be like this:

```
HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
Server: nginx
Date: Tue, 21 Mar 2023 08:27:58 GMT
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 162
Connection: keep-alive
```

> HTTP status `403` means that access is denied.

In the nginx error log `/var/log/nginx/error.log` you should see an error like this:

```log
2023/03/20 17:59:25 [error] 25216#1896: *18 access forbidden by rule, client: 10.0.0.5, server: example.com, request: "GET / HTTP/1.1", host: "10.0.0.1"
```

> `10.0.0.5` is the IP of the blocked client, and `example.com` is the value of the `server_name` directive.

Congratulations! You blocked access to yourself. To rollback your changes, you need to remove the `deny` directive and reload the nginx configuration.

Multiple `allow` and `deny` directives can be specified. The first directive that matches will be used.
The two special directives `allow all;` and `deny all;` always match, and they should be placed at the bottom of the `allow` / `deny` list.
For example:

```nginx
    allow 10.0.0.5;
    allow 10.0.0.6;
    deny all;
```

> Allow access to `10.0.0.5` and `10.0.0.6`, and block everybody else.

The complete configuration:

```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    location / {
        allow 10.0.0.5;
        allow 10.0.0.6;
        deny all;
    }
}
```

If your `server` listens on IPv6 ports, make sure to `allow` or `deny` IPv6 addresses too.

Instead of using the `location` context, you can also place the list of `deny` and `allow` directives in the `server` context:

```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    allow 10.0.0.5;
    allow 10.0.0.6;
    deny all;
    location / {
    }
}
```

In this case, the child context `location` will inherit the list of `allow` and `deny` directives from its parent context `server`.

However, if you specify at least one `deny` or `allow` directive in the `location` context, the entire list of `allow` and `deny` directives from the parent context `server` will be ignored. For example:

```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    allow 10.0.0.5;
    allow 10.0.0.6;
    deny all;
    location / {
        deny 10.0.0.7;
    }
}
```

In the `location` context, only `10.0.0.7` is blocked, all other IPs are allowed.
The list of `allow` and `deny` directives from the parent context `server` is ignored.

Instead of IP addresses, you can also specify subnets. For example:

```nginx
    allow 10.0.0.0/24;
    deny all;
```

Do not forget to reload the configuration after you made your modifications. Simply run:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

<details>

<summary><b>Attention!</b></summary>

1. If you have a configuration like this, requests to `example.com/admin/index.php` will **not** be protected:
   
   > The request is handled with the `location ~ \.php$` context. This means that the allow and deny directives of `location /admin` are **not** used.
   
   ```nginx
   server {
       listen 80;
       server_name example.com;
       location / {
       }
       location /admin {
           allow 10.0.0.5;
           allow 10.0.0.6;
           deny all;
       }
       location ~ \.php$ {
           try_files $fastcgi_script_name =404;
           fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php-fpm.sock;
           include fastcgi.conf;
       }
   }
   ```
   
   > * `location /` and `location /admin` are "prefix locations"
   > * `location ~ \.php$` is a "regular expression location"
   
   In the example request `example.com/admin/index.php`:
   
   * The path `/admin` matches with the "**prefix location**" `location /admin`.
   * The file `index.php` matches with the "**regular expression location**" `location ~ \.php$`.
   
   Nginx remembers the longest **prefix location** that matches the request, in this example that's `location/admin`. However, it will only use the **prefix location** to process the request if no **regular expression location** matches the request. In this example, the regular expression location `location ~ \.php$` matches the request and is used.
   
   **Regular expression locations** are marked with a tilde `~` or `~*`. Starting from the top of the `server` block, nginx first checks every **prefix location** inside out. The first matching regular expression location that nginx can find is automatically used.
 
   Hence, the regular expression `location` must be defined separately for the protected prefix `location` as show below.
  
2. If you edit the configuration from above like this, requests to `example.com/admin/index.php` will be protected:
   
   > The request is handled with the first **regular expression locations** that matches the request.  In this configuration, that's the `location ~ \.php$` context within the `location /admin` context. This means that the allow and deny directives of `location /admin` **are used**.

   ```nginx
   server {
       listen 80;
       server_name example.com;
       location / {
       }
       location /admin {
           allow 10.0.0.5;
           allow 10.0.0.6;
           deny all;
           location ~ \.php$ {
               try_files $fastcgi_script_name =404;
               fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php-fpm.sock;
               include fastcgi.conf;
           }
       }
       location ~ \.php$ {
           try_files $fastcgi_script_name =404;
           fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php-fpm.sock;
           include fastcgi.conf;
       }
   }
   ```
  
3. If you don't like duplication, you can put the common parts into a file and refer to this file via an `include` directive. In this example, the file `/etc/nginx/php.conf` can be created with these directives:
   
   ```nginx
   try_files $fastcgi_script_name =404;
   fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php-fpm.sock;
   include fastcgi.conf;
   ```
   
   Now, it can be included:
   
   ```nginx
   server {
       listen 80;
       server_name example.com;
       location / {
       }
       location /admin {
           allow 10.0.0.5;
           allow 10.0.0.6;
           deny all;
           location ~ \.php$ {
               include php.conf;
           }
       }
       location ~ \.php$ {
           include php.conf;
       }
   }
   ```

</details>

## Step 3 - Using the geo module to allow or deny access

As a more flexible alternative to the `allow` and `deny` directives, you can use the nginx module `geo`.
The `geo` module lets you create a variable with a value that depends on a client IP address. This variable can be used later in request processing.
This mechanism is not specifically for restricting access but can be used as such. Let's return to our example from the previous chapter which uses `allow` and `deny`, and which allows two IP addresses and blocks all others.

```nginx
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    location / {
        allow 10.0.0.5;
        allow 10.0.0.6;
        deny all;
    }
}
```

This example can be translated to use the `geo` module:

> `0 = allow` and `1 = deny`

```nginx
geo $not_allowed {
    10.0.0.5  0;
    10.0.0.6  0;
    default   1;
}

server {
    listen 80;
    server_name example.com;
    location / {
        if ($not_allowed) {
            return 403 "You're not allowed to access. Your IP is $remote_addr";
        }
    }
}
```

This approach is a little more flexible as you can see. You can set any HTTP status code by changing `403` to somethings else,
and you can show the message to the blocked client. The message can contain variables.

* In contrast to the `deny` directive, you will not see anything in `error.log` when the user is blocked. As with other requests, it will be logged to `access.log`.

* If you want to use `return`, then you need to use `geo` with `if` instead of `allow` and `deny`.

  `allow` and `deny` will not work with `return`, because `return` is executed earlier than `allow` and `deny`, and the result will be returned regardless if a user is allowed to access.

## Step 4 - Configuring restrictions based on the geographical location

**Requirements:**

* Ubuntu 20.04 or later.

* nginx is installed from the Ubuntu repositories.

  If you installed nginx from [third-party repositories provided by nginx project](https://nginx.org/en/linux_packages.html), this instruction will not work because their repositories don't provide the required dynamic module.

First of all, you need to install the nginx dynamic module `geoip2` which adds support for the IP databases with geographical information. The database will be queried to determine the country of the user by their IP. This information in turn will be used to allow or block access.

- Install the required package:
  
  ```bash
  sudo apt update && sudo apt install libnginx-mod-http-geoip2
  ```
  
- Check the `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` file:
  
  By default, at the beginning of the file `/etc/nginx/nginx.conf` and outside of any curly brackets, you must have the uncommented line:
  
  ```nginx
  include /etc/nginx/modules-enabled/*.conf;
  ```
  
  If it's not the case, you need to add or uncomment it.
  
  Alternatively, you can load only `geoip2` module like this:
  
  ```nginx
  load_module modules/ngx_http_geoip2_module.so;
  ```
  
- Reload the nginx configuration:
  
  ```bash
  sudo systemctl reload nginx
  ```

Now you only have the `geoip2` module, this is not enough to start enabling restrictions.

You need to download the `geoip2` compatible IP database that can be used to check the country of a user. 

- Install the required package:
  
  
  ```bash
  cd /etc/nginx && sudo curl --fail -LO https://github.com/P3TERX/GeoLite.mmdb/releases/latest/download/GeoLite2-Country.mmdb
  ```
  
  Alternatively you can [create an account](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geolite2/signup?lang=en) on the MaxMind website and download the GeoLite2 Country database from there:
  
  1. Open the [registration form](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geolite2/signup?lang=en) in your browser and fill it in.
  2. You will receive an email with the link to create your password.
  3. [Log in](https://www.maxmind.com/en/account/login) with your email and password.
  4. Go to `Account / Manage License Keys` and create a new license key. Copy your license key and save it somewhere.
  5. Now you can download the GeoLite2 Country database by running this command:
  
    ```bash
    cd /etc/nginx && sudo curl --fail -o GeoLite2-Country.tar.gz "https://download.maxmind.com/app/geoip_download?edition_id=GeoLite2-Country&license_key=YOUR_LICENSE_KEY&suffix=tar.gz" && sudo tar --strip-components=1 -xzf GeoLite2-Country.tar.gz --wildcards "*.mmdb" && sudo rm GeoLite2-Country.tar.gz
    ```
    > Replace `YOUR_LICENSE_KEY` with your license key. The database is saved to the file `/etc/nginx/GeoLite2-Country.mmdb`.
    
- Edit the nginx configuration
  
  Now you need to edit your nginx configuration to add the `geoip2` directive which loads the database into nginx. After the database is loaded, it can be used to block or allow access.
  The complete configuration may look like this:
  
  > `0 = allow` and `1 = deny`

  ```nginx
  geoip2 /etc/nginx/GeoLite2-Country.mmdb {
      $user_country country iso_code;
  }
  
  map $user_country $not_allowed {
      CA       1;
      US       1;
      default  0;
  }
  
  server {
      listen 80;
      server_name example.com;
      location / {
          if ($not_allowed) {
              return 403 "You're not allowed to access.";
          }
      }
  }
  ```
  
  * `geoip2` directive is used to specify the path to an IP database and to define variables.
  In the example above, the variable `$user_country` is defined.
  When the request is processed by nginx, this variable is set to the user country's two-letter code.
  
  * `map` directive is used to create the boolean variable `$not_allowed`. Its value is chosen according to the `$user_country` variable defined in the `geoip2` block.
  In this example configuration, the users from United States and Canada are blocked, users from other countries are allowed. The two-letter country codes which can be used inside the `map` are listed [on this Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1#Current_codes).
  
  * Finally, the `$not_allowed` variable is used inside the `if` statement to block or allow a request.
  
You can find more information about the `geoip2` module on its [GitHub page](https://github.com/leev/ngx_http_geoip2_module).

## Step 5 - Password-based authentication

You can restrict access by only allowing access to users with a password. This is called HTTP Basic authentication. To prevent sending your username and password in clear text, you first need to setup HTTPS for your `server`.

> You can use [this tutorial](https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/add-ssl-certificate-with-lets-encrypt-to-nginx-on-ubuntu-20-04) to setup HTTPS.
> The configuration you will end up with will be similar to this:
> 
> ```nginx
> server {
>     server_name example.com;
>     location / {
>     }
> 
>     listen 443 ssl; # managed by Certbot
>     ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem; # managed by Certbot
>     ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem; # managed by Certbot
>     include /etc/letsencrypt/options-ssl-nginx.conf; # managed by Certbot
>     ssl_dhparam /etc/letsencrypt/ssl-dhparams.pem; # managed by Certbot
> }
> ```
> 
> After you have configured HTTPS, you can setup the password-based authentication.

First of all, you need to create a special file where all usernames and corresponding passwords are stored.
You can create it like this:

```bash
sudo touch /etc/nginx/users
```

You can use this command to add users:

* Follow the prompts. If you made a mistake, you can cancel the command by pressing `Ctrl + C`.

* Note that this command uses `sudo` and may ask for your password, this is not the password for the new user.

```bash
python3 -c 'from subprocess import *; import sys; print("Username: ", end="", file=sys.stderr); user = input();
passwd = run(["openssl", "passwd", "-6"], encoding="utf-8", stdout=PIPE).stdout.strip();
print("Username or password is empty. Try again!", file=sys.stderr) if user == "" or passwd == "" else print(user + ":" + passwd)' | sudo tee -a /etc/nginx/users
```

Above command will add the user to the `/etc/nginx/users` file, and additionally output the username and hash of the password to your terminal separated by a colon `:`.
The password itself is not stored on the server.

You can add more users to `/etc/nginx/users` by repeating the same `python3` command above.
You can manually edit `/etc/nginx/users` to remove users. Each user is on a separate line.

The special file with users is created and you can now modify your `server` block.
You need to add the two directives `auth_basic` and `auth_basic_user_file` to your `server` configuration.
The resulting configuration will look like this:

```nginx
server {
    server_name example.com;
    location / {
    }
    auth_basic "Protected area!";
    auth_basic_user_file /etc/nginx/users;

    listen 443 ssl; # managed by Certbot
    ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem; # managed by Certbot
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem; # managed by Certbot
    include /etc/letsencrypt/options-ssl-nginx.conf; # managed by Certbot
    ssl_dhparam /etc/letsencrypt/ssl-dhparams.pem; # managed by Certbot
}
```

Reload nginx to apply your changes:

```bash
sudo systemctl reload nginx
```

You can test the new configuration with `curl`:

* Without username and password:

  ```bash
  curl --verbose https://example.com
  ```

  In this case you should get HTTP status `401` and no requested content. Response headers will look like this:

  ```
  < HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
  < Server: nginx
  < Date: Fri, 24 Mar 2023 09:13:54 GMT
  < Content-Type: text/html
  < Content-Length: 179
  < Connection: keep-alive
  < WWW-Authenticate: Basic realm="Protected area!"
  ```

* With username and password:

  Replace `user` with your username, `password` with your password created using the `python3` command above, and `example.com` with your domain.

  ```bash
  curl --verbose -u user:password https://example.com
  ```

  This time you should get HTTP status `200` and the requested content. Response headers will look like this:
  
  ```
  < HTTP/1.1 200 OK
  < Server: nginx
  < Date: Fri, 24 Mar 2023 09:06:12 GMT
  < Content-Type: text/html
  < Content-Length: 615
  < Last-Modified: Mon, 20 Mar 2023 14:48:42 GMT
  < Connection: keep-alive
  < ETag: "6418724a-267"
  < Accept-Ranges: bytes
  ```

-------------

**Restricting access to a single URL**

- You can restrict access to a single URL by adding the `auth_basic` and `auth_basic_user_file` directives directly to a `location` context instead of its parent-context `server`. For example:
  
  ```nginx
  server {
      server_name example.com;
      location / {
      }
      location /admin {
          auth_basic "Protected area!";
          auth_basic_user_file /etc/nginx/users;
      }
  
      listen 443 ssl; # managed by Certbot
      ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem; # managed by Certbot
      ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem; # managed by Certbot
      include /etc/letsencrypt/options-ssl-nginx.conf; # managed by Certbot
      ssl_dhparam /etc/letsencrypt/ssl-dhparams.pem; # managed by Certbot
  }
  ```
  
  Here, `location /admin` is protected by password-based authentication.

-------------

**Logging of wrong access details**

- If someone used the wrong password, it will be logged to the `/var/log/nginx/error.log` file like this:
  
  ```log
  2023/03/28 12:06:49 [error] 1865#1865: *14 user "holu": password mismatch, client: 10.0.0.5, server: example.com, request: "GET / HTTP/1.1", host: "example.com"
  ```

- If someone used a username that doesn't exist in the `/etc/nginx/users` file, it will be logged to the `error.log` file like this:
  
  ```log
  2023/03/28 12:08:21 [error] 1865#1865: *16 user "root" was not found in "/etc/nginx/users", client: 10.0.0.5, server: example.com, request: "GET / HTTP/1.1", host: "example.com"
  ```

## Conclusion

Hopefully this tutorial was useful to you and you learned something new. nginx can be tricky to configure, the [official documentation](https://nginx.org/en/docs/) and [mailing list archives](https://mailman.nginx.org/mailman/listinfo) are useful resources to learn more. Mailing list archives can be searched by this [Google search query](https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Ahttps%3A%2F%2Fmailman.nginx.org%2Fpipermail).

##### License: MIT

<!--

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: wpdevelopment11 wpdevelopment11@gmail.com

-->
