---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/make-a-minecraft-server"
slug: "make-a-minecraft-server"
date: "2022-03-04"
title: "How to create a Minecraft server on a VPS"
short_description: "This tutorial explains how to create a Minecraft server on a VPS or a dedicated server"
tags: ["Minecraft", "Gaming"]
author: "Yusuf Yaser"
author_link: "https://github.com/YusufYaser"
author_img: "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/69477938"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-5"
cta: "dedicated"
---

## Introduction

</br>
</br>
</br>
This tutorial will teach you how to create a Minecraft server on your VPS or dedicated servers.
</br>
</br>

This tutorial was tested on **Debian 11**.
Debian 11 is recommended, since it is very light yet very stable. Minecraft can require a lot of RAM, so Debian helps to reduce the memory usage of the overall server. It is easily possible that your Debian server will use less than 80MB of RAM when not running your minecraft server. The syntax of all commands will be identical on Ubuntu 20.04.


**Prerequisites**

You need the following software before starting:

* `screen`
* `nano` (or your favourite text editor)
* You will also need to install Java.

 **1.8.X -> 1.16.X** `openjdk-8-jre-headless`

 **1.17.X** `openjdk-16-jre-headless`

 **1.18.X** `openjdk-17-jre-headless`

**Getting started:**

We first want to read the repository files and than upgrade our system

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade
```
You can install `screen` using this command:

```bash
sudo apt install screen -y
```

And you can install Java using this command replacing the `JAVA` with the one specified above.

Syntax: `sudo apt install JAVA -y`

Example:

```bash
sudo apt install openjdk-17-jre-headless -y
```

</br>
</br>

## Step 1 - Setting up user

</br>
We first need to create a new user to run our Minecraft server on. The user is required, since it is dangerous to run applications with root permissions. A user will have limited access to most files, drastically increasing the security of your Minecraft server.

You can run this command to create a new user.

```bash
sudo adduser mcserver
```

You will be asked to enter a password. Make sure to choose a secure one! It is recommendable to use a password with 16 Characters.

Then, you may leave these empty.

```bash
Changing the user information for mcserver
Enter the new value, or press ENTER for the default
	Full Name []: 
	Room Number []: 
	Work Phone []: 
	Home Phone []: 
	Other []: 
```

To login to our new user and go to the home directory of the user, we run:

```bash
su mcserver
cd ~
```
</br>
</br>

## Step 2 - Setting up files

</br>
You need to create  directory for your Minecraft server files. After that we will change our working directory to this path. Using `&&` allows us to chain 2 commands in one line.

You can do that using the following command:

```bash
mkdir MinecraftServer && cd MinecraftServer
```

---

After you do that, you need to download your server JAR file.

**Please note:**
For security reasons you only should download your `server.jar` from `https://www.minecraft.net/en-us/download/server`.

Since there is no permalink visible, we cannot link it here.

Right click on the link:
"Download `minecraft_server.1.18.2.jar` and run it with the following command:"

You can now copy the URL with the help of the Dialog Box.

You should now have a link in your clipboard that looks similar to:

`https://launcher.mojang.com/v1/objects/c8f83c5655308435b3dcf03c06d9fe8740a77469/server.jar`

You can use this command to download the vanilla server JAR replacing the `VERSION` with the version you want.

```bash
wget https://launcher.mojang.com/v1/objects/c8f83c5655308435b3dcf03c06d9fe8740a77469/server.jar
```

There are performance and stability optimized versions available for example on:
`https://serverjars.com/`

Unfortunately it cannot be verified, how secure external sources are. But these can be downloaded in a similar fashion:

Example:

`wget -O server.jar https://serverjars.com/api/fetchJar/vanilla/1.18.1`


If you would like to use Paper, you can run this command replacing the `VERSION` with the version you want

```bash
wget -O server.jar https://serverjars.com/api/fetchJar/paper/VERSION
```

Example:

`wget -O server.jar https://serverjars.com/api/fetchJar/paper/1.18.1`
</br>
</br>
</br>

## Step 3 - Starting your server

</br>
After you have created your Minecraft server folder and have your server JAR file in it, you can open a new terminal window with the name `MinecraftServer` using `screen`. You can name it however you like.

```bash
screen -S MinecraftServer
```

Once your screen is started This now should create a new screen, after that you need to finally start your server.
You can run this command replacing the **<MEMORY\>** to how much RAM you want to give to your Minecraft server in MB. Please do not use all the memory of your system. Always leave a few hundred MB of headroom for your operating system. The CX11 and CPX11 for example has 2GB of RAM, so running a Debian 11 will leave around 1.5G usable for your Minecraft server.

`java -Xms512M -Xmx<MEMORY>M -jar server.jar`

```bash
java -Xms512M -Xmx1536M -jar server.jar
```

You can also change the **server.jar** with your actual server JAR that you have in your Minecraft server folder.

Example:

`java -Xms512M -Xmx4096M -jar I_renamed_server.jar`

Starting your server for the first time will fail, because neither `eula.txt` exists, nor was it confirmed. Running the server will create the file. Now you need to edit `eula.txt`:

To do that simply use the command line editor nano, by running:

```bash
nano eula.txt
```

And change the line matching `eula=false` to `eula=true`, if you accept their EULA and want to run the server.

Press `<ctrl>+s` to save and than `<ctrl>+x` to exit nano.

Now start your server again using the same command as the first time.

`java -Xms512M -Xmx<MEMORY>M -jar server.jar`

Since you are still in a screen, you can exit it by pressing   first followed directly by `<ctrl>+d`

If you need to adjust settings later, you can reconnect by first listing the screen or multiple screens if you created multiple servers:

```bash
screen -ls

There are screens on:
	6312.MinecraftServer	(03/24/2022 09:34:51 AM)	(Detached)
	6309.MinecraftServer2	(03/24/2022 09:34:44 AM)	(Detached)
```

Now note the numbers in front of the MinecraftServer. This is the number you want to use, to view the running screen. For example:

```bash
screen -r 6312
```
</br>
</br>
### Step 3.1 - Joining your server

</br>
It is simple to join your Minecraft server!

After starting it, on the main menu press `Multiplayer` than `Add Server`. Under Server Name type whatever you want to distinguish your server to other servers.

Under Server Address you can use your server's IP address to join your server. Example:
`<ServerIP>`

If you have changed your server port, you can use this IP:
`<ServerIP>:<Port>`

So you would type this for example:
`123.123.123.123:25565`

Now press `Done` and by double clicking on the server entry you just created you should automatically log in to the server.
</br>
</br>
</br>
## Step 4 - Advanced: Auto restart your server

</br>
We can create a script to auto restart our server if it crashes. If you currently are the root user, change to your Minecraft user and go to the directory of your `server.jar` as before. List the screens and than go back to your screen:

```bash
su mcserver
cd ~
cd MinecraftServer
screen -ls
screen -r <screen-ID>
```

If it is running, you can stop your Minecraft server using the `stop` command.

After that, run:

```bash
nano run.sh
```

After running this command, copy this script, paste it and than adjust the parameters as required:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

while true; do
	java -Xms512M -Xmx<MEMORY>M -jar server.jar
    for i in 3 2 1; do
    	echo "The server will restart in $i second(s), CTRL-C to cancel."
        sleep 1
    done
done
```

Don't forget to replace the `<MEMORY>` to how much RAM you want to give to your Minecraft server in MB.

After that, click `<ctrl>+s` to save the file then `<ctrl>+x` to exit.

To make your script executable, run this command:

```bash
chmod +x run.sh
```

This will add the executable Flag to the files permission and is required for all executable files in linux.

And finally, run `run.sh` and your server will auto restart.

```bash
run.sh
```

To exit your screen press `<ctrl>+a` and `<ctrl>+d`.
</br>
</br>

## Step 5 - Professional: Tuning your server to the max.

</br>

### 5.1 - Java Memory Settings
#### 5.1.1 Overall Memory Requirement

If you want to run a larg server with many players, you might need more RAM. This table can help you find a recommendation


Players | Recommended RAM
------  | ------
1-5     | 1GB
6-10    | 1.5GB
11-15   | 2GB
16-20   | 2.5GB
21-25   | 3GB
26-30   | 4GB
31-40   | 5GB
41-60   | 6GB
61-80   | 7GB
81-100  | 8GB

The colon Recommended RAM holds the value you should paste to your java command:

`java -Xms512M -Xmx<MEMORY>M -jar server.jar`

You can also use `G` on the `-Xmx` Parameter:
`-Xmx8G` 
</br>
</br>

#### 5.1.2 Garbage Collection and Performance Optimization

</br>
There are a lot of parameters that can optimize the performance of your Minecraft server running on Java. These are all related to the garbage collection of the Java runtime. Older garbage collectors used to be very complicated to tune, but ZGC is becoming more common and well known. It is much more advanced, yet simpler to tune than older garbage collectors due to much less parameters. It is also optimized for lower latency. ZGC is NUMA aware, which results in Java trying to allocate memory to the NUMA local memory. It is already activated by default.


Let us for example start with a very simple command, wich should suffice for 5 players. This is what you could use on the Hetzner CPX11 vServer:
`java -Xmx1024M -jar server.jar -nogui`

Now let us see, what possibilities we have:

```bash
-Xmx<MEMORY>                      # Sets max Heap size of Java VM
-XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions  # Required to tweak some Garbage Collection options
-XX:ConcGCThreads=2               # Sets the concurrent threads used for garbage collection, not required
-XX:-UseParallelGC                # Disables old Garbage Collection methods
-XX:-UseG1GC                      # Disables old Garbage Collection methods
-XX:+UseZGC                       # Enables new ZGC Garbage Collection method
-XX:GCTimeRatio=99                # Sets Ratio of Program vs GC time. 99 default. Lower, if server cannot handle memory garbage.
-XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50           # Tries to finish Garbage collection within 50 milliseconds
-jar server.jar                   # Open specific file
--nogui                           # disable GUI (minecraft server parameter) 
```

Let us pretend we want to play with more people. The CPX31 has 8GB of ram so we would expect to be able to play with over 80 people. This will not work on a vServer with vanilla minecraft, since it does not handle multithreading well at all and we are not using cores with very high clock speeds either. We need to adjust some parameters and use a different minecraft server jar. This is what all the providers of those huge servers are doing. They do for example use paper minecraft. We will also pretend, that we want to use a mod that is not built properly and would not work with memory access protection. We will use 7.5GB for this server:

`java -Xmx7680M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:-UseParallelGC -XX:-UseG1GC -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar paper.jar --nogui`

</br>
</br>

##### Comparision of different parameters on Vanilla Minecraft on JDK 17:


###### A quick comparision shows different render times for different JVM RAM sizes with Debian (very light):

Baseline: All servers used the same map seed and had no other services running in the background. Please consider running your own tests under load, since map generation is not the only important thing.
Seed: 8145144813194222318
</br>
</br>

**Tests on CPX11 with 2vCPU and 2GB RAM**

</br>
</br>

Stock settings
Command | Result
-|-
`java -Xmx512M -jar server.jar --nogui` | 105 Seconds
`java -Xmx1024M -jar server.jar --nogui` | 83 Seconds
`java -Xmx1536M -jar server.jar --nogui` | 70 Seconds, >300MB RAM free on peak

</br>
</br>

ZGC Flags
Command | Result
-|-
`java -Xmx512M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:-UseParallelGC -XX:-UseG1GC -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | Crashes (out of memory)
`java -Xmx1024M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:-UseParallelGC -XX:-UseG1GC -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | 260 Seconds, >400MB RAM free on peak, Can't keep up! Is the server overloaded? Running 2100ms or 42 ticks behind
`java -Xmx1536M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:-UseParallelGC -XX:-UseG1GC -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | 166 Seconds, >100MB of Swap required, Can't keep up! Is the server overloaded? Running 2018ms or 40 ticks behind

</br>

Reduced ZGC Flags
Command | Result
-|-
`java -Xmx512M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | Crashes (out of memory)
`java -Xmx1024M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | 280 Seconds, >400MB RAM free on peak, Can't keep up! Is the server overloaded? Running 2150ms or 43 ticks behind
`java -Xmx1536M -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | 177 Seconds, >70MB of Swap required

</br>

ShenandoahGC flags
Command | Result
-|-
`java -Xmx512M -XX:+UseShenandoahGC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:+UseLargePages -XX:+UseTransparentHugePages -XX:ConcGCThreads=8 -XX:+UseNUMA -XX:ShenandoahGarbageThreshold=25 -XX:ShenandoahInitFreeThreshold=70 -XX:ShenandoahMinFreeThreshold=10 -XX:ShenandoahAllocSpikeFactor=10 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -jar server.jar --nogui` | 1049 Seconds, absolutely unusable
`java -Xmx1024M -XX:+UseShenandoahGC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:+UseLargePages -XX:+UseTransparentHugePages -XX:ConcGCThreads=8 -XX:+UseNUMA -XX:ShenandoahGarbageThreshold=25 -XX:ShenandoahInitFreeThreshold=70 -XX:ShenandoahMinFreeThreshold=10 -XX:ShenandoahAllocSpikeFactor=10 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -jar server.jar --nogui` | 265 Seconds, Can't keep up! Is the server overloaded? Running 2315ms or 46 ticks behind
`java -Xmx1536M -XX:+UseShenandoahGC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:+UseLargePages -XX:+UseTransparentHugePages -XX:ConcGCThreads=8 -XX:+UseNUMA -XX:ShenandoahGarbageThreshold=25 -XX:ShenandoahInitFreeThreshold=70 -XX:ShenandoahMinFreeThreshold=10 -XX:ShenandoahAllocSpikeFactor=10 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -jar server.jar --nogui` | 193 Seconds, >50 MB of Swap required

</br>

Oldschool aikar flags
Command | Result
-|-
`java -Xms512M -Xmx512M -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=4 -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=90 -XX:G1RSetUpdatingPauseTimePercent=5 -XX:SurvivorRatio=32 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=1 -XX:G1NewSizePercent=30 -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=40 -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=8M -XX:G1ReservePercent=20 -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=15 -Dusing.aikars.flags=https://mcflags.emc.gs -Daikars.new.flags=true -jar server.jar nogui` | 414 Seconds
`java -Xms1024M -Xmx1024M -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=4 -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=90 -XX:G1RSetUpdatingPauseTimePercent=5 -XX:SurvivorRatio=32 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=1 -XX:G1NewSizePercent=30 -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=40 -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=8M -XX:G1ReservePercent=20 -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=15 -Dusing.aikars.flags=https://mcflags.emc.gs -Daikars.new.flags=true -jar server.jar nogui` | 78 Seconds, over 400MB RAM free on peak
`java -Xms1536M -Xmx1536M -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=4 -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=90 -XX:G1RSetUpdatingPauseTimePercent=5 -XX:SurvivorRatio=32 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=1 -XX:G1NewSizePercent=30 -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=40 -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=8M -XX:G1ReservePercent=20 -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=15 -Dusing.aikars.flags=https://mcflags.emc.gs -Daikars.new.flags=true -jar server.jar nogui` | 75 Seconds, over 100MB of Swap required

</br>
</br>

**Tests on CX31 with 2vCPU and 8GB RAM**

</br>

Type | Command | Result
-|-|-
Default |`java -Xmx4G -jar server.jar --nogui` | 73 Seconds
ZGC Flags | `java -Xmx4G -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | 111 Seconds
ShenandoahGC flags | `java -Xmx4096M -XX:+UseShenandoahGC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:+UseLargePages -XX:+UseTransparentHugePages -XX:ConcGCThreads=8 -XX:+UseNUMA -XX:ShenandoahGarbageThreshold=25 -XX:ShenandoahInitFreeThreshold=70 -XX:ShenandoahMinFreeThreshold=10 -XX:ShenandoahAllocSpikeFactor=10 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -jar server.jar --nogui` | 116 Seconds
Oldschool aikar flags | `java -Xmx4G -Xmx4G -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=4 -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=90 -XX:G1RSetUpdatingPauseTimePercent=5 -XX:SurvivorRatio=32 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=1 -XX:G1NewSizePercent=30 -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=40 -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=8M -XX:G1ReservePercent=20 -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=15 -Dusing.aikars.flags=https://mcflags.emc.gs -Daikars.new.flags=true -jar server.jar nogui` | 72 Seconds

</br>
</br>

**Tests on CPX41 with 4vCPU and 16GB RAM**

</br>

Type | Command | Result
-|-|-
Default | `java -Xmx14G -jar server.jar --nogui` | 30 Seconds
ZGC Flags | `java -Xmx14G -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar server.jar --nogui` | 47 Seconds 
ShenandoahGC flags | `java -Xmx14G -XX:+UseShenandoahGC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:+UseLargePages -XX:+UseTransparentHugePages -XX:ConcGCThreads=8 -XX:+UseNUMA -XX:ShenandoahGarbageThreshold=25 -XX:ShenandoahInitFreeThreshold=70 -XX:ShenandoahMinFreeThreshold=10 -XX:ShenandoahAllocSpikeFactor=10 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -jar server.jar --nogui` | 35 Seconds
Oldschool aikar flags | `java -Xms14G -Xmx14G -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=4 -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=90 -XX:G1RSetUpdatingPauseTimePercent=5 -XX:SurvivorRatio=32 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=1 -XX:G1NewSizePercent=30 -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=40 -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=8M -XX:G1ReservePercent=20 -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=15 -Dusing.aikars.flags=https://mcflags.emc.gs -Daikars.new.flags=true -jar server.jar nogui` | 33 Seconds

</br>
</br>

###### Testing with paper.jar

</br>

**Tests on CPX41 with 4vCPU and 16GB RAM**
These test where repeated, since the numbers where so low, to verify the repeatability
</br>
</br>

Type | Command | Result
-|-|-
Default | `java -Xmx14G -jar paper.jar --nogui` | <ul><li>8.7</li><li>9.1</li><li>9.0</li></ul>Seconds
ZGC Flags | `java -Xmx14G -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:ConcGCThreads=2 -XX:+UseZGC -XX:GCTimeRatio=99 -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=50 -jar paper.jar --nogui` | <ul><li>8.8</li><li>8.4</li><li>9.1</li></ul>Seconds
ShenandoahGC flags | `java -Xmx14G -XX:+UseShenandoahGC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:+UseLargePages -XX:+UseTransparentHugePages -XX:ConcGCThreads=8 -XX:+UseNUMA -XX:ShenandoahGarbageThreshold=25 -XX:ShenandoahInitFreeThreshold=70 -XX:ShenandoahMinFreeThreshold=10 -XX:ShenandoahAllocSpikeFactor=10 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -jar paper.jar --nogui` | <ul><li>9.5</li><li>9.4</li><li>9.8</li></ul>Seconds
Oldschool aikar flags | `java -Xms14G -Xmx14G -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ParallelRefProcEnabled -XX:MaxGCPauseMillis=200 -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+DisableExplicitGC -XX:+AlwaysPreTouch -XX:G1HeapWastePercent=5 -XX:G1MixedGCCountTarget=4 -XX:G1MixedGCLiveThresholdPercent=90 -XX:G1RSetUpdatingPauseTimePercent=5 -XX:SurvivorRatio=32 -XX:+PerfDisableSharedMem -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=1 -XX:G1NewSizePercent=30 -XX:G1MaxNewSizePercent=40 -XX:G1HeapRegionSize=8M -XX:G1ReservePercent=20 -XX:InitiatingHeapOccupancyPercent=15 -Dusing.aikars.flags=https://mcflags.emc.gs -Daikars.new.flags=true -jar paper.jar nogui` | <ul><li>9.6</li><li>9.6</li><li>9.9</li></ul>Seconds

**Conclusion:**
As we can see, the spread with Minecraft Paper Server narrows down significantly, aswell as the overall server preparation. But the benefits to paper are far bigger:
- Control the performance by limiting dynamic entities on the server to a given count
- Control the performance by disabling certain events
- Drastically improve the performance by code optimizations regarding multi-thread usage, both for player handling and garbage collection

We also can see, that flags do not improve the rendering time of the world. However the real benefit comes down to lag spikes ingame. This effect is very hard to measure, but vanilla Minecraft with no flags or even with ZGC flags will likely perform much worse than both servers setup with ShenandoahGC and Aikar flags.

</br>
</br>

## 6. Bonus

</br>

**This is section is for tips and tricks.**

This section contains a list of commands which are often combining multiple commands. Please use them at your own risk or know what you are doing first.
</br>
</br>

###### Remove all files of the current directory except server.jar, server.properties and eula.txt if world/server creation failed and needs to be redone:
`rm -vR !('server.jar'|'server.properties'|'eula.txt')`

This can be especially helpful, if you want to regenerate the same world over and over to check the rendering time of the world using different parameters.
</br>
</br>
</br>

###### Find a good seed and use it on a server

You can generate a seed for your current minecraft version on this external link:

https://www.chunkbase.com/apps/seed-map

open your config before creating a new world: `nano server.properties` and edit the line `level-seed=your_level_seed_here`

Be sure to donate for chunkbase, if you use their service.
</br>
</br>
</br>

###### Create a small swap file if you want to go to the limit with your RAM usage for the server

A Java VM can exceed the memory available and will crash, if no more bytes are free to allocate to it. SWAP will be very slow and cannot be used as RAM, but it can help to prevent a crash. So as a very quick and dirty method you can create 1GB of swap within the root directory with the following command (run as root!):

```bash
fallocate -l 1G /swapfile; chmod 600 /swapfile; mkswap /swapfile; swapon /swapfile; echo "/swapfile swap swap defaults 0 0" >> /etc/fstab; echo "Successfully performed all actions and created a persistent Swap file"
```

If you see the message `Successfully performed all actions and created a persistent Swap file`, every step worked correctly and the swap file works after a reboot. Do not run it twice, since double entries in /etc/fstab could make the system unbootable.
</br>
</br>
</br>

###### Reset the swap, so that the usage is 0

If you want to tweak the Xmx settings of your minecraft server you might want to monitor the swap usage. If you need to run a test and it requires your swap to be completely empty, simply run the following command and swap will get set again.

```
bashswapoff -a; swapon -a;
```
</br>
</br>
</br>

###### Deploy a standard nftables firewall on debian

You can deploy and activate an nftables firewall to only accept SSH Port 22 and minecraft port 25565 using only one command:

```bash
echo $'#!/usr/sbin/nft -f\n\nflush ruleset\n\ntable inet filter {\n        chain input {\n                type filter hook input priority 0;\n                iif lo accept\n                ct state established,related accept\n                tcp dport { 22, 25565 } ct state new accept\n                ip protocol icmp icmp type { echo-request} accept\n                ip6 nexthdr icmpv6 icmpv6 type { nd-neighbor-solicit,  nd-router-advert, nd-neighbor-advert } accept\n                counter drop\n        }\n        chain forward {\n                type filter hook forward priority 0; policy drop;\n        }\n        chain output {\n                type filter hook output priority 0; policy accept;\n        }\n}\n' > /etc/nftables.conf && systemctl restart nftables && systemctl enable nftables && echo $'\n\n\n\n >>> Successfully performed all steps and deployed nftables firewall config! <<<\n'
```

Run this command as root. If the success message gets printed, all other commands returned no error code. Basic IPv6 connectivity and ICMP are still activated, but ports cannot simply be scanned anymore. You may adjust the settings as you like. If you want to insert the config using the above command please ensure to keep the spaces or the config could fail to load.

**Please note:**
This will overwrite the existing nftables.conf! If you have any other rules applied, those will get lost.
</br>
</br>
</br>

###### Deploy fail2ban to protect your SSH further

Although SSH keys are recommended and typically very safe we can further harden the server by banning users performing failed login attempts repeatedly for 5 hours in this case.

```bash
apt update && apt install fail2ban -y && cp /etc/fail2ban/jail.conf /etc/fail2ban/jail.local && sed -i 's/bantime  = 10m/bantime = 5h/' /etc/fail2ban/jail.local && systemctl restart fail2ban && systemctl enable fail2ban && echo $'\n\n\n\n >>> Successfully performed all steps and deployed fail2ban! Status is of fail2ban is: <<<\n' && systemctl status fail2ban | grep Active
```

If you run this command as root, fail2ban will be installed and the config will be copied. The bantime will get changed from 10m to 5h. After that the service will get reloaded and you should see a success message followed by the status of the service. If the status is not `active (running) since...` you can run `systemctl status fail2ban` to see the error message on which it failed.

## Conclusion

You have created a Minecraft server, and you know how to access it's console, and you have successfully joined it.

##### License: MIT

<!---

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: [Yusuf Yaser me@yusufyaser.xyz]

-->
