---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/setup-a-tor-relay-on-freebsd-12"
slug: "setup-a-tor-relay-on-freebsd-12"
date: "2019-06-24"
title: "Setup a Tor Relay on FreeBSD 12"
short_description: "This tutorial will show you how to install and configure a Tor Relay on FreeBSD 12"
tags: ["FreeBSD", "Tor"]
author: "youiopmop"
author_link: "https://github.com/youiopmop"
author_img: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/15812985"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-3"
---

## Introduction

Tor is an onion network that allows people to anonymously access the internet or Tor hidden services by connecting through a series of relays.

This guide will show you how to install and configure Tor as guard/middle relay.

*We will be configuring Tor strictly as a guard/middle relay only, as exit relays can generate abuse requests for your server's IP address, and many networks/hosts will ban you after too many abuse requests. Running a Tor relay as a guard/middle relay only will not garner any abuse reports.*

* It is assumed that you are running as the `root` user during this guide. Use `su` to change to `root` if you are not running as `root` already.

**Prerequisites**

* A FreeBSD 12 server with root access.

## Step 1 - Updating FreeBSD

*By default, FreeBSD does not come with the `pkg` package manager, but comes with a tool to bootstrap it. If FreeBSD asks to install it, answer 'Yes'.*

It is best to update the system beforehand to ensure you are getting the latest packages when installing Tor. You can do this by running the following command:

```
pkg update ; pkg upgrade
```

This will update the repositories of `pkg`, and then upgrade any installed packages that you may have.

## Step 2 - Setting up NTP

Having the exact time set is critical for Tor to function correctly. To make sure that you have the correct time, add the following to `/etc/rc.conf`.

```
ntpdate_enable="YES"
ntpdate_hosts="pool.ntp.org"
```

This will sync your local time with the `pool.ntp.org` NTP server on startup. To start the service:

```
service ntpdate start
```

## Step 3 - Installing Tor

Next, we need to install Tor and the SSL Root Certificates, so we can use it as a Tor relay. To do so:

```
pkg install tor ca_root_nss
```

Then, we need to make sure that Tor runs on startup.

```
echo 'tor_enable="YES"' >> /etc/rc.conf
```

To configure Tor, edit `/usr/local/etc/tor/torrc` and add the following:

```
Nickname exampleNick
ORPort 9001
#ORPort [2001:db8:1234::1]:9001 # Listening for IPv6 Connections
DirPort 9030
ExitPolicy reject *:*
ExitRelay 0
ContactInfo tor@example.com
Log notice syslog
#AccountingStart month 1 00:00
#AccountingMax 1000 GB
```

* Replace `exampleNick` with a nickname (alphanumeric, up to 19 characters) for your Tor relay to be identified by, and replace `tor@example.com` with a working email address so that you can be contacted if there is an issue with your relay.

* If you have a firewall, make sure to open TCP ports 9001 and 9030 so that Tor is accessible from the outside.

* If you have IPv6 working on your server, uncomment the second `ORPort` line and replace the IP address with your server's public IPv6 address.

* To prevent possible traffic analysis from sequential IP IDs, add the following to your `/etc/sysctl.conf` file:

* Some hosts limit the amount of traffic you can use per month on your server, if that is the case then uncomment `AccountingStart` and `AccountingMax` and replace `1000` with your monthly bandwidth allocation in gigabytes.

```
net.inet.ip.random_id=1
```

Finally, start the service:

```
service tor start
```

Tor should now be running, and after a few hours your relay should be seen on the [Tor relay search page](https://metrics.torproject.org/rs.html).

## Step 4 - Installing vnstat (Optional)

To monitor how much traffic your server is using, it is a good idea to install vnstat. This allows you to record how much data is being sent/received from your server.

Install vnstat by running the following:

```
pkg install vnstat
```

Then change the default network interface in `/usr/local/etc/vnstat.conf` to the network interface that you are using (run `ifconfig` to find out what your network interface is).

```
Interface "re0"
```

After that, enable and start the service:

```
echo 'vnstat_enable="YES"' >> /etc/rc.conf
service vnstat start
```

To use it, just run `vnstat`, however it will take a little while before any data can be displayed by vnstat. Test that it is working by doing a live capture with `vnstat -l`. Further documentation on how to use vnstat is avaliable [here](https://humdi.net/vnstat/)

## Conclusion

Congratulations!! You should now have a working guard/middle Tor relay! It will take a few days for Tor to be used as a relay, and the bandwidth utilisation will slowly increase until it reaches its peak after about 2 months of operation. For more information, please refer to https://blog.torproject.org/lifecycle-new-relay

* Further monitoring of your Tor relay can be done using `nyx`, with features like showing how much bandwidth is being used in realtime, any information/errors about your relay, listing your torrc config, listing active connections, and more. Information is available at [https://nyx.torproject.org/](https://nyx.torproject.org/).

* It is a good idea to backup your Tor Identity Keys which are located in `/var/db/tor/keys` so that if you move your relay to another server or if your disk fails, you do not have to go through the inital ramp-up process of new Tor relays

* You should also subscribe to the tor-announce mailing list to get information about any new Tor releases or security issues so that you can update your Tor relay in a timely fashion.

* After two months of running a Tor relay (at 500KB/s average speed) you are [eligible for a free Tor T-Shirt](https://2019.www.torproject.org/getinvolved/tshirt.html).

##### License: MIT

<!---

Contributors's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: youiopmop <rosethorn@riseup.net>

-->
