---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/setup-mailserver-with-mailcow"
slug: "setup-mailserver-with-mailcow"
date: "2023-02-01"
title: "Set up your own mail server with Mailcow"
short_description: "This tutorial will walk you through the process of setting up your own mail server on Ubuntu running in Docker"
tags: ["Mailserver", "Docker"]
author: "kev-ac"
author_link: "https://github.com/kev-ac"
author_img: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/60135953"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en", "ru"]
header_img: "header-1"
---

_(The original tutorial was written by [ntimo](https://github.com/ntimo) in 2019 and was updated to the current state and new topics)_

## Introduction

In this tutorial you will setup your own mail server running on an Ubuntu Server in the Hetzner Cloud.
With Mailcow you can host your own mail server with your custom domain. Mailcow also provides a way to sync your Contacts and Calendar.

Official documentation: [https://docs.mailcow.email/](https://docs.mailcow.email/)<br>
Project Website: [https://mailcow.email](https://mailcow.email)<br>
GitHub: [https://github.com/mailcow/mailcow-dockerized](https://github.com/mailcow/mailcow-dockerized)<br>
Community forum: [https://community.mailcow.email](https://community.mailcow.email)

**Prerequisites**

* You need a domain name
* A bit of knowledge of how Docker works
* Hetzner Cloud servers **by default block port 25 and 465** to protect from spammers. You can request to get the ports unblocked after your first invoice was paid. This basically acts as a simple verification, that you are not a spammer.

## Step 1 - Create a new Cloud server

* Sign-in to the [Cloud Console](https://console.hetzner.cloud)
* Create a new project and name it whatever you want
* Choose a server location and type depending on your needs. _See below for tips if you are unsure._
* Click `Add Server` and select your server image. This tutorial is based around `Ubuntu 22.04` but can easily be adapted to `Debian 11`, which is more stable and lighter.
* Choose the resources you need from Type
* Click on the field `Cloud config` enter this: `#include https://get.docker.com` (this will install docker)
* Select your SSH key
    * You can read [this article](https://help.github.com/en/enterprise/2.16/user/articles/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent) to learn how to generate an SSH key
* Write your server hostname in `name` input (mail.example.com)
* Click `Create & Buy Now`

### How to choose the correct server location and type

Choose a server location which is geographically closest to you or your user base.

In regard to the correct server type, keep in mind that Mailcow requires **at least** 7GB RAM to function properly.<br>
Mailcow is a fully-featured groupware solution.
Having that said, the lowest server type available would be a **CX33*** or **CPX32**.

_*Availability of the CX line depends on your chosen location. As of the time of writing CX servers are not available in US locations._

## Step 2 - Setup DNS

Basically, you want to create a new DNS record called mail.example.com and add your server IPv4 (A record) and IPv6 (AAAA record) to it.
Then, you can set up your domains MX record to point to your `mail.example.com` subdomain that you just created.
You also need to set up an `autodiscover.example.com` and `autoconfig.example.com` subdomain. Both should be of the type CNAME and point to `mail.example.com`.

Your DNS configuration should look similar to this:

```shellsession
# Name              Type       Value
mail                IN A       10.0.0.1
mail                IN AAAA    2001:db8:1234::1
autodiscover        IN CNAME   mail
autoconfig          IN CNAME   mail

@                   IN MX 10   mail
```

For a more advanced setup, there are more DNS records you should watch out for in the [Mailcow documentation](https://docs.mailcow.email/getstarted/prerequisite-dns/).

## Step 3 - Install updates and Docker Compose on the server

Wait a few seconds for the server to startup and then connect to it using SSH and your private key.
Now you should install available updates on your server by running:

```bash
apt update && apt upgrade -y
```

This is a good time to reboot the server after all upgrades are finished, especially if there are kernel updates.

## Step 4 - Clone the Mailcow Repository

Now we are going to clone the Mailcow GitHub repository, so first you need to `cd` to `/opt` with:

```bash
cd /opt
```

Once you are in `/opt`, you can run:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mailcow/mailcow-dockerized
```

## Step 5 - Create the config, pull the Docker containers, and start Mailcow

> When you run `./generate_config.sh`, you need the [latest version of docker compose v2](https://docs.mailcow.email/getstarted/install/#docker-compose). You can use `docker compose version` to get your version and check if you need to [upgrade to version 2](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/compose-versioning/#version-1-to-2x).

To create the config, change your working directory to `/opt/mailcow-dockerized` with `cd /opt/mailcow-dockerized` and run `./generate_config.sh` this will generate the config. Now you have to enter your domain name (something like mail.example.com).

We are nearly done. Now, you have to run `docker compose pull` to pull the docker images.

In order to start Mailcow, run `docker compose up -d`

## Step 6 - Set up the reverse DNS entries

To set up your reverse DNS entries, do the following steps:

- Go to the Hetzner Cloud console and click on your project
- Select the server you just created and go to the `NETWORKING` tab
- Click the three dots near your **IPv4** address, select `Edit Reverse DNS`, enter your domain (mail.example.com), and confirm the change.
- Click the three dots near your **IPv6** subnet, select `Edit Reverse DNS`, and type `::1` into the field where the IP is below your domain name (mail.example.com).

## Step 7 - First login to your Mailcow instance

Visit your Mailcow instance at `https://mail.example.org` and log in with the default credentials:

* Username: `admin`
* Password: `moohoo`

**Important:** Change your password as soon as possible, as leaving it as is opens your server up for breaches.

## Step 8 - Add domain(s) to Mailcow

Now, you can add your domain to Mailcow. Simply go to `Configuration` -> `Mail setup`. Add your domain under the tab "Domain".

## Step 9 - Setup DKIM

Now, when you go back to `Configuration` -> `Configuration & Details` you can set up DKIM. In the `Configuration` tap, select DKIM in the sidebar. It should be at the top. Scroll down till you see the mask where you can enter your domain. Simply click `Select domains with missing keys` shortcut to have your domain name filled in. Now, select a `2048` key and click on `Add`. Once the key is added, you can copy the public key and create a DNS TXT entry called `dkim._domainkey` with the content you just copied.

## Step 10 - Create a mailbox

When you go back to `Configuration` -> `Mail setup`, you can create a mailbox and log into SOGo by accessing it at https://mail.example.com/SOGo.

## Step 11 - Creating backups 

Backups are essential for most server setups. Your mail server is no different. Mailcow provides a very simple way to create backups of your mail data.

### Create a manual backup

- Connect to your server using your SSH key.
- Go to the Mailcow directory which contains the backup script `/opt/mailcow-dockerized/helper-scripts`
- Run the backup script `./backup_and_restore.sh backup all --delete-days 7`
  - The script will ask you for your backup location.
  - `--delete-days 7` will remove any backup in the chosen directory which is older than 7 days. Alter the value or remove it entirely depending on your needs.

The process can take some minutes to a few hours depending on your mails size and server type.

### Create automated backups

- Connect to your server using your SSH key.
- Run `crontab -e` to enter your cron task list.
  - If it is the first time you run this command, you will be asked to choose an editor. Choose `(1) /bin/nano` as it is the easiest for new users.
- Paste the following into your crontab and update the details depending on your setup (see below):

```shell
0 5 * * * MAILCOW_BACKUP_LOCATION=/opt/mailcow-backups /opt/mailcow-dockerized/helper-scripts/backup_and_restore.sh backup all --delete-days 7
```

`MAILCOW_BACKUP_LOCATION` is the folder the backups will be written to. If you have a big mail database, consider adding a Volume to your server to expand its storage.<br>
`--delete-days 7` will remove any backup in the chosen directory which is older than 7 days. Alter the value or remove it entirely depending on your needs.

### General recommendations

Consider the general rules of storing backups when creating a Mailcow instance. This includes having a copy of your backup in another location than your servers' disk (for example a [Hetzner Storagebox](https://www.hetzner.com/storage/storage-box)).

## Step 12 - Updating your Mailcow instance

Updates for Mailcow are generally released once per month by the authors. If there are urgent security patches or bugs, more updates are released. It is wise to keep an eye on the [releases page](https://github.com/mailcow/mailcow-dockerized/releases) of Mailcow for information about changes.

Before executing updates, it is recommended to check if you have current backups of your data. In the Hetzner Cloud Console, you can also create a [Snapshot](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/backups-snapshots/overview) of your server to quickly revert back to a working state if something goes wrong.<br>
If you don't want to use Hetzner Snapshots, Mailcow also has a [built-in way to roll back from updates](https://docs.mailcow.email/maintenance/update/#can-i-roll-back).

- Connect to your server using your SSH key.
- Go to the Mailcow directory `/opt/mailcow-dockerized`
- Run `./update.sh`
  - The script will first check if there is a new `update.sh` file available and will update it. If this is the case, you have to re-run the script.
  - Then, all other updates will be pulled and prepared to be updated. You have to confirm the update.
- At the end, Mailcow will ask if you want to delete the now unused components. Select **no** and optionally delete them manually later on to be prepared if something went wrong.
- After the update is done, Mailcow will start up all services and run internal upgrades. **Do not** shut down your server or the docker containers to prevent data corruption.

##### License: MIT

<!--

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: kev-ac oss@thiefes.de

-->
