# Proxmox multi-node cluster with Hetzner Cloud. 
# 1. Quick installation of Proxmox on the nodes with help of Rescue system
## Overview
As part of this tutorial series you will get deeper in initialization of multi-node Proxmox cluster with help of Hetzner Cloud infrastructure. Whether you want to use Plex and attach 1TB cloud drive for movies and shows or setup the cluster for your business (routing, test and production environments, VMs) - you are in the right topic.

Our setup will be connected through Zerotier and include:
- Router instance - with Caddy and Cloudlare integration to secure the traffic, VPN for now;
- Dev server instance - Linux VMs and local services like API servers, Web-servers;
- Production server instance  - production services like Atlassian stack (Jira and Confluence) and other CentOS, Debian, Ubuntu LXC's.

Installation instructions on one node is available at Hetzner community tutorials :
https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/install-and-configure-proxmox_ve?title=Proxmox_VE/en

Next tutorials:
2. Initialize Proxmox node network for local containers to have internet access 
3. Creating cluster network between Proxmox servers with Zerotier
4. Inialization of Firewall to secure Proxmox node
5. LXC and VM launch with Proxmox dev node
6. Installation and management of Caddy and Cloudflare as Proxmox cluster main web-proxy
7. Installing Pritunl as VPN endpoint in Proxmox router node
8. Installing Jira, Confluence and their databases on the Proxmox production node

### What we use
1. Linux desktop @ Ubuntu 19.04
2. Internal terminal (you can pop it open pressing Ctrl+Alt+T) or Termius (Windows, Linux, MacOS, iOS, Android apps)
3. Local SSH keypair

### Why Proxmox?
Proxmox is an open-source platform for enterprise virtualisation based on Debian and KVM with analogues like: VMware vSphere, Microsoft Hyper-V  & XenServer.

Why Proxmox: 
1. It is free if you are not using enterprise features and, believe me, free version will be enough to use in even SMB environment in most of the cases;
2. LXC containers which give you more freedom by using less resources;
3. You can virtualize all the services you have (yes, VPN also included with TUN/TAP devices init!);
4. Quick snapshots @ ZFS/LVM-thin and deep backup/restore (a.e. nightly backups to Hetzner storage boxes) will give you less headache worrying over your data;
5. Powerful GUI: easy network management (devices, bridges, VLAN's), Firewall, 2FA for better security.

### Why the cluster?
Proxmox cluster is a group of server instances connected under one GUI for: 
1. Centralized, web based management from one node (each node can manage any of the cluster node);
2. Easy migration of VMs and LXCs between server instances;
3. Firewall for all of the server instances managed from one place;
4. HA with 3 and more nodes.

### Why Hetzner Cloud and not dedicated servers from auction or main page?
In short - we are using Cloud instances for low-cost better scaling and easy management, let me explain:
1. First and foremost - [it is less expensive](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/CloudServer/en#Billing "it is less expensive"), in this example we use 3 instances with total cost of ~20 eur/month (with 20% VAT included:);
2. We are using Rescue system and Rebuild for some of our instances and it gives us shocking speeds to build the system from the groung (you can count Cloud init and it will be a lot faster, you know);
3. Hetzner cloud console gives you similar experience as IP-KVM but withour access to BIOS settings (you can simply trace bugs);
4. We can use [floating ip](http://https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/CloudServer/en#What_are_floating_IPs_and_how_do_they_work.3F "floating ip") for easier web-service deployment with Cloudflare;
5. We are using [CEPH](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/CloudServer/en#What_is_the_difference_between_local_and_ceph_disks_for_servers_on_the_CX_models.3F "CEPH") instead of [local NVMe RAIDs](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/CloudServer/en#What_is_the_difference_between_local_and_ceph_disks_for_servers_on_the_CX_models.3F "local NVMe RAIDs") because it gives us more confidence in the data consistency;
6. We use [cloud volumes](https://wiki.hetzner.de/index.php/CloudServer/en#What_are_the_Hetzner_Cloud_Volumes.3F "cloud volumes") for some of server instances to store data, and it is a bliss to mount/remount to other instance;
7. And of course - we can Rescale our instance to a bigger one (a.e. CX11 -> CX31) if we need more power!

## Cluster initialization
### Start servers @ Hetzner Cloud
1. Login to https://console.hetzner.cloud/projects
2. Create new project
3. Login to project and click on "Add server" button
4. Create **Router** instance:
 - Location - choose any you like (but remeber that same location should be used for all the instances further)
 - Image - choose any you like, we will send the system to Rescue pretty soon
 - Type - click on "Network storage (CEPH)" and choose CX11(1 vCPI, 2GB RAM, 20 GB SSD)
 - SSH key - for your security and easier connection create SSH key and add its public part here 
 - Name - we suggest using "instance_name-instance_location-instance_id", but if we are going with only three instances we will not use location id, so it will be something like <**pve-router-fsn**>
 - Press "Create & buy now", the billing will start from that moment hour by hour but will not exceed total amount written at instance description if you are going to use it for the whole month
5. Create **Dev** server instance with same steps and choose your own instance plan (we will use CX31-Ceph), use same SSH key as for Router instance (it will be available to select in the panel), name we are using - <**pve-dev-fsn**>
6. Create **Prod** server instance with same steps and choose your own instance plan (we will use CX31-Ceph), use same SSH key as for Router instance (it will be available to select in the panel), name we are using - <**pve-prod-fsn**>

### Install Proxmox on all nodes
#### Install from Rescue of Hetzner system 
**You will receive only one ensX device with ipv6 address attached and no bridges if you install Proxmox on the Hetzner Cloud instance and it will not be routing all the requests properly with Caddy (a.e. Jira will pop errors that it cannot curl to itself). We will resolve this later**

Install proxmox on all the nodes one-by-one using **installimage** command of Hetzner (**IMPORTANT**: Proxmox installation from the "Other" option of menu is not managed by Hetzner and it has no responsibility on your actions):
1. Send the server to Rescue:
 - Go to Project servers main page;
 - Click on the "server-name";
 - Click on "Rescue" on the left vertical panel;
 - Click on "Enable rescue & power cycle", select "linux64" as RescueOS and your previously created SSH key, hot the red button below to reboot server to Rescue system;
 - Write down or save the password which appeared on the screen in case your SSH key will not work
 - Due to some technical requirement you need to click on "Power" on the left vertical panel, wait for 10sec and click on "Power on" so your server state in the management panel will change to "ON" in the top l eft corner.
2. SSH to your server from terminal or console of Hetzner (top left corner near server status, but paste command is not working properly there) with the command :
`ssh root@your-server-ip` ;
3. Answer "yes" to console asking to add host;
4. run `installimage`in the terminal window
5. Choose "Other" --> "Proxmox...Debian-Stretch" to install latest image available on the Hetzner server (they do real good job to keep it updated, so do not worry);
6. Hit "ok" --> "ok" and in the opened text editor find line starting with HOSTNAME, change it to `HOSTNAME your-desired-hostname.your-domain.your-ext`, a.e. we choose `HOSTNAME pve-router-fsn.xxxxxx.com` for our router instance, `HOSTNAME pve-dev-fsn.xxxxxx.com` for dev instance and `HOSTNAME pve-prod-fsn-xxxxx.com` for prod.
7. Find further in the document line `PART /ext4 all` and change it to (you can remove comments)
```
# we set boot folder to 512MB
PART /boot ext3 512M
# We create LVM VG named PVE to create LVM-thin disk later
PART lvm pve all
# root folder size depends on the size of attached main disk 
# (a.e. for CX-11 we use 4G, for CX-21 and CX-31 you can use 10G)
LV pve root /ext4 4G
```
8. You can put your SSH keys in installation script, but that totally depends on you, we will proceed with the password further beacuse of ease and security of the proxmox.
9. Press F10 on the keyoard or click on 10.Quit in the low right corner of the editor.
10. Press enter to confirm deletion of all the data from the drive and watch the progress
11. After the message `INSTALLATION COMPLETE` type in `reboot` in console and hit enter to reboot the server
12. In a couple minutes run `ssh root@your-server-ip` in terminal again, act accoding to the notification you will receive in console to delete improper host in your known_hosts (Ctrl-Shift-C the row, and paste it with Ctrl-Shift-V, hit Enter, run `ssh root@your-server-ip`). 
13. If everything is good and you can login to the server, you will see **root@pve-xxxxxx-xxx**,
14. run `nano /etc/apt/sources.list' to delete Enterprise subscription details (we do not have the subscription and it will pop an error while we try to update the server)
15. insert to the file new line `deb http://download.proxmox.com/debian stretch pve-no-subscription`
16. Run from terminal `rm -f /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pve-enterprise.list`
17. Run updates:
``` 
apt-get update
apt-get dist-upgrade
```
17. To be able to login into GUI Change root password with typing in terminal `passwd`  and typing your desired password 2 times.
18. Go to your browser and type <https://your-server-ip:8006> to login in the system GUI (accept the certificate, Proxmox is giving celf-signed certificate to the page) and check if you can log in. You can get server ip with `ip a` command and looking at `ens3` inet ip address

#### Create LVM-thin storage to create snapshots
**Snapshots will give you option to easily recover the container or VM to the store you previously saved. Creation of snapshot happens without stopping the container instead of creation of backups. As example, you can create the snapshot of the container on the moment when you installed OS, all needed packages, updated the system and packages or installed additional services and want to store it as an initial state of the container to make changes and play with the service.** 
1. In terminal create new thin-pool of the VG we created on installation - pve. `lvcreate -L XXG -n data pve`, where XX is the number of gigabytes free on your device after the installation, and data is the name of the storage you would like to create.
2. Convert the lv to thin-pool with `lvconvert --type thin-pool pve/data`, where data is the storage you created on previous step.
3. Login to Proxmox GUI, go to "Datacenter" -> "Storage" -> "Add" -> "LVM-thin", input id - the name of storage that will appear in the proxmox GUI, volume group - will pop you the suggestion ("pve", as we created), thin-pool - will pop you the suggestion too ("data", as we created). Hit "Add", you will see storage appeared in GUI under the node, if you click on it in the "server view".
P.S. if you would like to restrict storage from being available in GUI to other storages choose "Nodes" -> "Node" yo want it to be available to (mostly only itself)

#### Install Proxmox on other nodes 
1. Repeat the steps for all the server instances you plan to bring up
