---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/check-hostname-and-change-it-on-debian-9"
slug: "check-hostname-and-change-it-on-debian-9"
date: "2019-05-03"
title: "Check hostname and change it on debian 9"
short_description: "This tutorial explain how to check the hostname and change it on debian 9"
tags: ["debian", "hostname", "general"]
author: "yFStein"
author_link: "https://github.com/yfstein/"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/38380974"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: ""
---

## Introduction

The hostname of a linux system is an important component of the system. Not only that one can identify one's own system here, also software often needs a correctly set hostname for the clear identification. In functionality the hostname will bring up a name for your ip-adress. The host name is a domain name given to a host machine. U can set different hostnames, but to get fully qualified we just should set one per host. For example we use: foo.bar. Sure, we can name the system foo.bar if we just had this little server for just a little static webpage. But morely recommendable to choose a name for the host like "mail" for example for a mailserver or web for a webserver. So in our example (a little server for just differnt things) we use srv1.foo.bar so we can later - if we need more servers - just name the next one to srv2.foo.bar.

**Prerequisites**

-To make the hostname fully qualified you need to set the rDNS Entry of your machine to the wanted fqhn (fully qualified hostname). You can do this in the web console of your server.

-To make your hostname fully qualified you need to create a own "A" record in your DNS zone for your hostname. So in our example for the first little server for our domain foo.bar we create a "A" record with the Value "srv1.foo.bar" and the IP adress to the one of our machine. After 12-48 hours the DNS Changes globaly reachable.

-To check and change the hostname on your server, make sure you are logged into your server with a sudo user.

-This guide is based on a fresh installed debian 9 cloud server.

## Step 1 - Check the actual hostname

To check the actual hostname, u have three different ways. For the first u can type:
`sudo cat /etc/hosts`

The second command to let u show the hostname is:
`sudo hostname`

and the last way is:
`sudo hostname -f`

where the last option show you the configured fully qualified hostname.

## Step 2 - Change the actual hostname

Also when changing the hostname we have different possibilities. The simplest method would be this option:
`sudo hostnamectl set-hostname servername.fqdn.tld`

Here u just need to change servername.fqdn.tld to your servers fully qualified hostname, and the daemon will done the rest.  Then we restart the SSH service and the new hostname is set:
`sudo systemctl restart ssh`


So yes, u also can change the hostname manually. To check if the command set it right and changing it manually is similiar the same. We just open some files and change/check the hostname if its right:
`sudo nano /etc/hostname`


In this file just the name of the server should appear. In our case "servername". If not or u wanna do it manually, just change it to the wanted name. Next we check, if the mailname is the same:
`sudo nano /etc/mailname`


Eventually this file do not appear. In this case its not bad, if u dont have a mailserver on the machine. If u will later setup one, u setup the mailname anyway.
Also we check our /etc/hosts file:
`nano /etc/hosts`


It should look something like this:

    127.0.1.1 servername.fqdn.tld servername
    127.0.0.1 localhost
    
    ::1 ip6-localhost ip6-loopback servername.fqdn.tld servername
    fe00::0 ip6-localnet
    ff00::0 ip6-mcastprefix
    ff02::1 ip6-allnodes
    ff02::2 ip6-allrouters
    ff02::3 ip6-allhosts
	
Here u can see where the hostname is set and just change it to your needs.

After the changes, if wo done some manually, we restart the ssh service:
`sudo systemctl restart ssh`

## Conclusion

Finally, you have successfully checked and changes the hostname of your server.

##### License: MIT

<!---

Contributors's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: [yFStein info@meikelbloch.de]

-->
