---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/how-to-install-oxid-hetzner-webhosting"
slug: "how-to-install-oxid-hetzner-webhosting"
date: "2025-10-06"
title: "Install Oxid for Webhostings & Managed Server"
short_description: "Install OXID via SSH & Composer, adjust directories/permissions, set up PHP & database, complete installation of the shop in the browser."
tags: ["Guide", "Oxid", "Lang:PHP"]
author: "Dominik Poß"
author_link: "https://github.com/atmidian"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/atmidian"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en", "de"]
header_img: "header-6"
cta: "webhosting"
---

# What is OXID?

OXID and OXID eShop are German e-commerce platforms for setting up and operating online shops.  

Note:
We provide you with the option of installing OXID. As this is third-party software, we cannot guarantee its functionality and do not offer support for content-related or technical questions within OXID.
For more information and help, please visit:  https://docs.oxid-esales.com/eshop/de/latest/index.html

## Example names
- User name: oxidlc
- Host name: wwwXXX.your-server.com
- Database host name: xxxx.your-database.com
- Domain: example.fqdn

# Installing OXID

## Step 1 - Download OXID

You need at least Level 9 web hosting with SSH access and Composer to install OXID.
Connect to the server with your SSH user:
**Settings > Access details > Login details > SSH login**

Install [Composer](https://docs.hetzner.com/konsoleh/server-management/faq/installation-of-common-software#composer).
Make sure you are in your home directory when installing Composer.
You can check whether Composer has been installed successfully with `composer --version`.

Use `cd` (change directory) to change to your `public_html` directory.

Then execute the following command to install the Community Edition of OXID. Instead of `your_project_name`, please choose a name for your project yourself.
Make sure to replace `your_project_name` with the name of your project in all further steps.
If you operate multiple domains, it makes sense to choose a unique project name.

```
composer create-project --no-dev oxid-esales/oxideshop-project your_project_name dev-b-7.3-ce
```

## Step 2 – Adjust the start directory & set file permissions

**2.1 Open [konsoleH](https://accounts.hetzner.com/login)**

* Set the start directory of your domain to the folder `public_html/your_project_name/source`.
  You can set the start directory in konsoleH under:
  **Settings > Configuration > Server configuration > *public_html/your_project_name/source* > Set start directory**

**2.2 Start directory**

For OXID to run without errors, some directories must be writable. Adjust the permissions as follows:

```
cd ~/public_html/your_project_name
chmod -R 775 source/out/pictures/
chmod -R 775 source/tmp/
chmod -R 775 var/
```

If you receive further error messages due to missing write permissions during operation, please check the corresponding directories.

## Step 3 – Edit PHP settings

Settings > Configuration > PHP configurations

PHP version:
PHP8.2, PHP8.3, or PHP8.4

PHP settings:

* allow_url_fopen: On
* `memory_limit`: at least 64M
* `upload_max_filesize` / `post_max_size`: at least 50M
* `max_execution_time`: at least 60 seconds

## Step 4 – Create database

Create a MariaDB database in konsoleH. You can choose any name you like. In this guide, the database is called `oxid_htest`. Please replace this name with your chosen name in the following settings.

In konsoleH:
**Settings > Databases > MariaDB/MySQL > Add**

* Database: `oxid_htest`
* Login: `oxid_htest_1`
* Password: ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■

Confirm the creation (add) and leave the browser tab open to enter the access data later.

## Step 5 – Install OXID

Open the domain name (`public_html/your_project_name/source`) in your web browser. The installation page for OXID should be displayed there.
Here you can also check whether your settings meet the requirements for OXID.

* Select the desired language and click **START SETUP**
* Select the main delivery country (you can add additional countries later in the administration area)
* Select the language for the shop (additional languages can also be added later)

*Optional:* Check the box for regular updates – **recommended**
*Optional:* Allow connection to the OXID eSales servers

* Click **START SHOP INSTALLATION**
* Accept the license terms and click **CONTINUE**

Enter your database access data:

* Database server host name or IP address: xxxx.your-database.com
* Database server TCP port: 3306
* Database name: `oxid_htest`
* Database username: `oxid_htest_1`
* Database password: ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■

*Optional:* Create demo data – you decide whether you want to add test data.

* Click on **CREATE DATABASE NOW**

Here you can check the URL under which your shop will be created. If the settings are incorrect, check your start directory again.

Enter the admin data:

* Administrator email (used as username): `admin@example.tld`

* Administrator password: ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■

* Confirm administrator password: ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■

* Click on **SAVE DATA NOW**

Great! You have now successfully installed OXID. You can log in with your access data under **Go to shop administration** and select a theme.

## Step 6 – Updates and maintenance

OXID is managed via Composer. For security updates and new versions, regularly execute the following command in the project directory:

```
cd ~/public_html/your_project_name
composer update
```

Before each update, you should always create a complete backup of your files and database.

## Step 7 – Cron jobs for operation (optional)

For stable operation, it is advisable to automate regular tasks, e.g.:

* Empty cache and temporary files
* Start scheduled processes (e.g., newsletters, modules)

To do this, create an entry in the consoleH under **Settings > Tools > Cronjobs**, e.g.:

```
php ~/public_html/your_project_name/bin/oe-console oe:cleanup:tmp
```

This job regularly empties the cache and prevents potential problems during operation.

##### License: MIT
<!--
Contributor's Certificate of Origin
By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:
(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or
(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
(unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
indicated in the file; or
(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.
(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
or the license(s) involved.
Signed-off-by: Dominik Poß <admin@dposs.de>
-->
