---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/install-ubuntu-2004-with-full-disk-encryption"
slug: "install-ubuntu-2004-with-full-disk-encryption"
date: "2021-03-02"
title: "How to install Ubuntu 20.04 with full disk encryption"
short_description: "This tutorial shows how to install an encrypted Ubuntu 20.04 via installimage and remote unlock with SSH."
tags: ["Ubuntu", "installimage", "encryption", "dropbear", "FDE", "SSH", "initramfs"]
author: "Hetzner Online"
author_link: "https://github.com/hetzneronline"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/30047064?s=200&v=4"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en", "de"]
header_img: "header-6"
cta: "dedicated"
---

## Introduction

The [installimage](https://docs.hetzner.com/robot/dedicated-server/operating-systems/installimage) script in the [Hetzner Rescue System](https://docs.hetzner.com/robot/dedicated-server/troubleshooting/hetzner-rescue-system) provides an easy way to install various Linux distributions.

This tutorial shows how to use `installimage` to install an encrypted Ubuntu 20.04 system and add remote unlocking via SSH (dropbear) in initramfs stored in a separate `/boot` partition.

**Prerequisites**

* Hetzner account
* Server booted into the Rescue System
* RSA, ECDSA or ED25519 SSH public key
* No private networks attached on Hetzner Cloud

## Step 1 - Create or copy SSH public key

In order to remotely unlock the encrypted system SSH key is required. This key will also be used to later login to the booted system. The dropbear SSH daemon included in Ubuntu 20.04 only supports RSA and ECDSA keys. If you do not have such a key, you need to generate one.
**We recommend the use of ED25519 or ECDSA keys**.

For example to generate a 3072 bit RSA SSH key run:
```bash
ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 3072
```

Copy the public key to the rescue system, e.g. using `scp`:

```bash
scp ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub root@<your-host>:/tmp/authorized_keys
```

## Step 2 - Create or copy installimage config file

When `installimage` is called without any options, it starts in interactive mode and will open an editor after a distribution image has been selected. After exiting the editor, the installation will proceed and the corresponding configuration is saved as `/installimage.conf` in the installed system. In this tutorial we will pass such a configuration file to install directly.

Create a file `/tmp/setup.conf` with the following content or copy it to the server in the Rescue system.

Note: Replace `secret` with a secure password and adjust drive names and partitioning as needed.

```
CRYPTPASSWORD secret
DRIVE1 /dev/sda
BOOTLOADER grub
HOSTNAME host.example.com
PART /boot ext4 1G
PART /     ext4 all crypt
IMAGE /root/images/Ubuntu-2004-focal-64-minimal.tar.gz
SSHKEYS_URL /tmp/authorized_keys
```

This configuration will install Ubuntu on a single drive (`/dev/sda`) with a separate unencrypted `/boot` required for remote unlocking.

## Step 3 - Create or copy post-install script

In order to remotely unlock the encrypted partition, we need to install and add the dropbear SSH server to the initramfs which is stored on the unencrypted `/boot` partition. This will also trigger the inclusion of `dhclient` to configure networking, but without any extras. To enable support for Hetzner Cloud, we need to add a hook which includes support for RFC3442 routes.

In order to run these additional steps we need a post-install script for `installimage`

Create a file `/tmp/post-install.sh` in the Rescue system with the following content:

```bash
#!/bin/bash


add_rfc3442_hook() {
  cat << EOF > /etc/initramfs-tools/hooks/add-rfc3442-dhclient-hook
#!/bin/sh

PREREQ=""

prereqs()
{
        echo "\$PREREQ"
}

case \$1 in
prereqs)
        prereqs
        exit 0
        ;;
esac

if [ ! -x /sbin/dhclient ]; then
        exit 0
fi

. /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/functions
. /usr/share/initramfs-tools/hook-functions

mkdir -p \$DESTDIR/etc/dhcp/dhclient-exit-hooks.d/
cp -a /etc/dhcp/dhclient-exit-hooks.d/rfc3442-classless-routes \$DESTDIR/etc/dhcp/dhclient-exit-hooks.d/
EOF

  chmod +x /etc/initramfs-tools/hooks/add-rfc3442-dhclient-hook
}


# Install hook
if [[ $(grep -q ^flags.*\ hypervisor\  /proc/cpuinfo && echo "1") == "1" ]]; then
        add_rfc3442_hook
fi

# Copy SSH keys for dropbear
mkdir /etc/dropbear-initramfs/
cp /root/.ssh/authorized_keys /etc/dropbear-initramfs/

# Update system
apt-get update >/dev/null
apt-get -y install cryptsetup-initramfs dropbear-initramfs
```

Important note: make the post-install script executable:

```bash
chmod +x /tmp/post-install.sh
```

## Step 4 - Start installation

Before starting the installation check again the content of the following files:

* `/tmp/authorized_keys` - your public SSH key (RSA, ECDSA or ED25519)
* `/tmp/setup.conf` - installimage config
* `/tmp/post-install.sh` - is executable and contains the post-install script

Now you are ready to start the installation with the following command:

```bash
installimage -a -c /tmp/setup.conf -x /tmp/post-install.sh
```

Wait until the installation completes and check the `debug.txt` for any errors.

## Step 5 - Boot installed system

After the installation has finished and any errors are resolved, you can run `reboot` to restart the server and boot the newly installed system. You can watch the boot process if you have a KVM attached or via remote console on a Cloud instance.

After some time the server should respond to ping. Now login via SSH into dropbear and run `cryptroot-unlock` to unlock the encrypted partition(s).

Attention: In case of RSA, we must explicitly specify that this key is accepted.
If you use an ED25519 or ECDSA key, the parameter `-o` with the value is not needed and you need to adjust the path to your private key.
```
$ ssh -o "PubkeyAcceptedKeyTypes +ssh-rsa" root@<your-host> -i .ssh/id_rsa

BusyBox v1.30.1 (Ubuntu 1:1.30.1-4ubuntu6.3) built-in shell (ash)
Enter 'help' for a list of built-in commands.

# cryptroot-unlock 
Please unlock disk luks-80e097ad-c0ab-47ce-9302-02dd316dc45c:
```

If the password is correct the boot will continue and you will automatically be disconnected from the temporary SSH session.

After a few seconds you can login to your new system.

**Note: this guide is explicitly written for Ubuntu 20.04 only. It might not work on other distributions.**

##### License: MIT
