---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/communication-with-RESTful-API-from-terminal-and-PHP"
slug: "communication-with-RESTful-API-from-terminal-and-PHP"
date: "2024-08-07"
title: "How to send and receive data from a RESTful API using a terminal and PHP."
short_description: "In this tutorial, I will discuss how to communicate with the RESTful API using CURL. From the terminal and via PHP."
author: "Karol Sarbiewski"
author_link: "https://github.com/El-Karollo"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/167524708"
language: "en"
---

Hi. In this article I will write how to communicate with REST API using cURL library. I will discuss two approaches here: straight from the server terminal and through PHP. Both approaches will be based on cURL. I will try to tell everything as simply as possible.

## Terminal
### Installation
First, we will check if cURL is installed on the system. For this we will use the command
```bash
curl --version
```
If in terminal response we got the version and supported protocols - it means that we have cURL on the system. If an error pops up about the lack of cURL support, then we need to install it. Here are the commands depending on the distribution of the system.

**Ubuntu/Debian**
```bash
sudo apt install curl
```
**CentOS/RHEL**
```bash
sudo yum install curl
```
**Fedora**
```bash
sudo dnf install curl
```
**Arch Linux**
```bash
sudo pacman -S curl
```
**OpenSUSE**
```bash
sudo zypper install curl
```
From now on, cURL is installed and we can run it. For example, the command to download a file is:
```bash
curl -o file-on-your-localhost.html http://download.com/internet-file.html
```
### Communication with RESTful API
We'll start with a quick introduction. What is an API? It is an application programming interface with which we communicate to exchange information. For example: we have an API which is called “working time”. This is what we will query how much time Joe Doe was at work. In response from the API we will get information about this employee. We will use this example in the rest of the article.

#### Beginning and types of requests
Since the “conversation” with the API is done via HTTP requests then at the beginning we will have to call ``curl``. Another addition will be the ``-X`` flag. With it we define the request method: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE or PATCH. To find out which method does what - we need to go to the documentation of the specific API. I will also add that the GET method is automatically selected in cURL also we do not have to add ``-X GET`` every time (but we can). Let's assume that in our example we need to use the POST method. Our command so far:
```bash
curl -X POST
```

#### We add headings
Headers are a “greeting” from the HTTP request. They help define the security of the interaction, control the cache or tell you how to interpret the text being sent. There can be several headers in one request - usually there are more than two. They are added with the ``-H`` flag, while the content of the header is in 'apostrophes'.

Since our API requires us to provide a token (security layer; so that the API knows that we are the person we claim to be) we need to add the **Authorization** header. The next header will be **Content-Type** which is information about what kind of data we will send to the API. In our case it will be text in JSON form. Our command so far:
```bash
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN' -H 'Content-Type: application/json'
```
If we need to add another header just add another flag ``-H`` - for example: ``-H 'Content-style: another header full of information'``

#### We send specific data
The next element of the command is the data we want to send in the API request. They are usually in the form of JSON. This is also how it will be in our case. Since we are querying the API for work time, we should provide the first name and last name of the working person. Our JSON looks like this:
```json
{
  "name": "John",
  "lastname": "Doe"
}
```
Our JSON can also be written in a single string, i.e. ``{"name":"John","lastname":"Doe"}``. To include this data in our query we need to use the ``-d`` flag, ie: ``-d '{"name":"John","lastname":"Doe"}'`` (do not forget the apostrophe). Our command so far:
```bash
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"name":"John","lastname":"Doe"}'
```
I will also mention that when we have JSON data in a file - we can also use it. Let's assume the file is called **data.json**. In that case, we need to add ``@data.json`` to our ``-d`` flag. Our command so far:
```bash
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d @data.json
```
#### More information from API
This flag is additional, but quite necessary. We are talking here about the ``-i`` flag. Thanks to it we will get - not only the response from the API - but also information about the response headers. Thanks to this we will know if our response has a code of - for example - 200 (that is, the query executed correctly). Our command so far:
```bash
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"name":"John","lastname":"Doe"}' -i
```

#### Where should we send it?
The final missing element is the address of our API itself. It will be located at the end of the query. There will be no need to write a flag before it - just the address/link itself. Our command so far:
```bash
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"name":"John","lastname":"Doe"}' -i https://how-much-worked.api.com/post
```
Our entire command for cURL is already written. All we need to do is press the RETURN key and we get the response from the RESTful API.

#### Sample response from API
```json
HTTP/2 200
date: Wed, 31 Jul 2024 21:37:00 GMT
content-type: application/json
content-length: 789
server: gunicorn/19.9.0
access-control-allow-origin: *
access-control-allow-credentials: true

{
    "name": "Joe",
    "last_name": "Doe",
    "hours_working": {
        "monday": "8 hours",
        "tuesday": "5 hours",
        "wednesday": "free",
        "thursday": "10 hours",
        "friday": "7 hours",
        "saturday": "free",
        "sunday": "free"
    }
}
```
First, we have information about the response headers from the API server. The first line is very important because it tells us that the query was executed successfully - that is, the code 200. HTTP codes can also have other values. Below is a table with the http codes which are assumed to be valid (sometimes the response HTTP code is set individually - then you should read about it in the documentation of the specific API).

| HTTP code | Meaning of code         |
|-----------|-------------------------|
| 100 - 199 | Informational responses |
| 200 - 299 | Successful responses    |
| 300 - 399 | Redirection messages    |
| 400 - 499 | Client error responses  |
| 500 - 599 | Server error responses  |

In next line we have the date. Next two lines tell us the content of the request and the last three are server or access information. All this information was provided by using the ``-i`` flag in the cURL command.

The further part of the response is already the actual content from the API. Here - as we can see - we got the data we asked for. We got information about Mr. Joe Doe and his working hours. I think we have the basics of sending requests to the API from the command line covered.

## PHP
Now it's time for PHP. Here, as before, we'll use the cURL library to send requests. As before we will operate on our imaginary API.

### Initializing cURL in code
First, we need to inform PHP that we will want to use cURL. At the very beginning we will have to give it the address to our API server. Also, we'll make a cURL setting right away so that our response is returned as text. Our cURL variable will be named ``$ch`` - as it usually is, by default.

```php
$url = 'https://how-much-worked.api.com/post';

$ch = curl_init($url);
curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_RETURNTRANSFER, true); //respone in text
```

### We set the headers
Now we need to set the headers. This will be an array in which any header will be separated by a comma.
```php
curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_HTTPHEADER, array(
	'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN',
	'Content-Type: application/json'
));
```
If we want to add some more headers - we need to add them in the above array. For example, we add header ``Content-style: another header full of information``. It will look like this:
```php
curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_HTTPHEADER, array(
	'Authorization: Bearer SUPER-SECRET-TOKEN',
	'Content-Type: application/json',
	'Content-style: another header full of information'
));
```

### POST, GET, PUT?
Now we need to tell cURL what type of request we want to send the data. In our case, it will be POST. To the code we add:
```php
curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_POST, true);
```

If we want to make another type of request, such as PUT, PATCH, GET, DELETE, we need to replace the above code with the one below. The code below uses a PUT request. Of course, we can change it to the type we currently need.
```php
curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_CUSTOMREQUEST, 'PUT');
```

### The data we will send
Now we need to define the data we want to send to the API. As we remember - it will be a query of how much Joe Doe worked.
We can easily format the data in two ways and pass it to CURL.

**Array** <br>
The first way is to create a classic array. The data we will use looks as follows:
```php
$data = array(
	"name" => "John",
	"lastname" => "Doe"
);

curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_POSTFIELDS, json_encode($data));
```

**JSON string**<br>
The second way is to use classic JSON in the form of a string. The code looks like this:
```php
$data = '
{
	"name": "Joe",
	"lastname": "Doe"
}';

curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_POSTFIELDS, $data);
```

### Sending...
Now we already have to proceed with the software of sending the entire query to the API. We will add a variable that will store the HTTP code of the request, and we will also add a simple error intelpletion of the cURL itself. Finally, we'll close the cURL to free up memory and close the connection.

```php
$response = curl_exec($ch); //sending
$http_code = curl_getinfo($ch, CURLINFO_HTTP_CODE); //request code

if(curl_errno($ch)) { //catch errors
	echo 'cURL error: ' . curl_error($ch);
	curl_close($ch);
	exit;
}

curl_close($ch); //closing CURL
```

### We process the results
Now that the connection has been closed it remains for us to process the results. The first thing will be to check if we have a valid HTTP code (in our example it will be 200 or 201). Then we'll convert the JSON result into an array to echo it later.

```php
//checking http code
if ($http_code == 200 || $http_code == 201) {
	$response_data = json_decode($response, true); //json to array

	echo "Name: " . $response_data['name'] . "\n"; //echo name
	echo "Last Name: " . $response_data['last_name'] . "\n"; //echo last name

	echo "Hours Working:\n"; //show headline
	//loop for echo all the days and hours of work
	foreach ($response_data['hours_working'] as $day => $hours) {
		echo ucfirst($day) . ": " . $hours . "\n";
	}
}
```

To make it easier for us to debug the query in the future - we can add "else" after the condition that checks the HTTP code. This condition will show the response from the server as well as the HTTP code.

```php
if ($http_code == 200 || $http_code == 201) {
	//all the code above
} else {
	echo "HTTP Error: " . $http_code . "\n"; //show HTTP code
	echo "Response: " . $response . "\n"; //show raw response

	$error_data = json_decode($response, true); //decode JSON to array
	print_r($error_data['errors']); //we can print full array with errors - usually the API responds with such a JSON when query id bad/broken
}
```

## The end
We got it! You just acquired a new skill. You already know how to send a query to the REST API using a terminal and PHP - congratulations :)

##### License: MIT
