---
path: "/tutorials/install-and-configure-proxmox_ve"
slug: "install-and-configure-proxmox_ve"
date: "2021-04-29"
title: "Install and Configure Proxmox VE"
short_description: "This tutorial describes the basics of installing Proxmox VE, an open source virtualization platform."
tags: ["Hetzner Official", "Proxmox"]
author: "Hetzner Online"
author_link: "https://github.com/hetzneronline"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/30047064?s=200&v=4"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en", "de", "ru"]
header_img: "header-4"
cta: "dedicated"
---

## Introduction

Proxmox VE is an open source virtualization platform with support for KVM and (as of version 4.0) Linux Containers (LXC). Furthermore, since Proxmox 4.0 there is also full support for IPv6. For a more detailed changelog please visit the [official Roadmap](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Roadmap) in the Proxmox VE Wiki.

The installation is generally considered uncomplicated, since OpenVZ already does a lot of preparatory work, and only a few more things need to be configured.

Warning: As of version 4.0, support for OpenVZ has been removed and completely replaced with LXC. Please take note of this before you upgrade! For more information about converting OpenVZ containers to LXC, see the [Proxmox Wiki](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Convert_OpenVZ_to_LXC)

## Before the installation

First, some suggestions and advice before starting to setup the new environment:

* Are only linux machines going to be used? Then under certain circumstances LXC would be sufficient.
* Should LXC or KVM be used? Both have their advantages as well as disadvantages. A thoughtful decision and good research can provide less work/trouble in the future.
* Although KVM is not as performant as LXC, it provides a complete hardware virtualization and enables the operation of all of the most common operating systems (including Windows). A conversion of the virtual disks in formats such as VMDK is simple.

## Step 1 - Installation

### Step 1.1 - The basic installation on a Hetzner server

Boot the server into the [Rescue-System](https://docs.hetzner.com/robot/dedicated-server/troubleshooting/hetzner-rescue-system/).

Run [installimage](https://docs.hetzner.com/robot/dedicated-server/operating-systems/installimage/) select and install the required Debian OS.

In order to operate as stably as possible, it is recommended to use the appropriate version of Debian to match the Proxmox version, which is also used in the official pre-installation media:

* since Proxmox 4.0: Debian 8 (jessie)
* since Proxmox 5.0: Debian 9 (stretch)
* since Proxmox 6.0: Debian 10 (buster)

Configure the RAID level, partitioning and hostname as required

Save the configuration and after completion of the installation perform a restart

### Step 1.2 - Adjust the APT sources (/etc/apt/sources.list)

The next step would be to adapt the APT sources:
`echo "deb http://download.proxmox.com/debian/pve buster pve-no-subscription" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/pve-install-repo.list`

Add the Key:
`curl -#o  /etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/proxmox-ve-release-6.x.gpg http://download.proxmox.com/debian/proxmox-ve-release-6.x.gpg`

Now update the packages:

```console
apt update          # Update package lists
apt upgrade         # Bring all packages up to date
apt dist-upgrade    # Bring Debian up to date
```

### Step 1.3 - Install Proxmox VE

Since Proxmox brings its own firmware, the existing firmware packages should first be uninstalled:

`apt purge firmware-bnx2x firmware-realtek firmware-linux-free`

After that, Proxmox can be installed.

`apt-get install proxmox-ve`

After a restart, the Proxmox kernel should be loaded:

```console
# uname -rv
5.4.103-1-pve #1 SMP PVE 5.4.103-1 (Sun, 07 Mar 2021 15:55:09 +0100)
```

### Step 1.4 - Load the kernel module

Check if the module `kvm` has been loaded:
`lsmod | grep kvm`

If the module has not been loaded, then this will need to be done manually:

For Intel CPUs:

```console
modprobe kvm
modprobe kvm_intel
```

For AMD CPUs:

```console
modprobe kvm
modprobe kvm_amd
```

Note: The kernel modules are required for the `KVM hardware virtualization`. If these are not present, no KVM guests can be started.

## Step 2 - Network Configuration

First of all, it is important to decide which virtualization solution (`LXC`and/or `KVM`) and which variant (`bridged`/`routed`) will be used.

##### LXC (Linux Containers)

* Advantages:
  * lightweight, fast, lower RAM requirement.
* Disadvantages:
  * The kernel of the host system is used.
  * Only Linux distributions can be used.

##### KVM (Kernel-Based Virtual Machine)

* Advantages:
  * Almost any operating systems can be installed.
* Disadvantages:
  * Higher resource usage, since VMs are using their own kernel.

#### Routed

* Advantages:
  * Multiple single IP addresses and subnets can be used in one VM.

* Disadvantages:
  * Point-to-point setup is required for IP addresses from different networks.

#### Bridged

* Advantages:
  * Host is transparent and not part of the route.
  * VMs can directly communicate with the gateway of the assigned IP.

* Disadvantages:
  * VMs may only communicate via the MAC address assigned to the respective IP address. The virtual MAC must be requested in the Hetzner Robot.
  * IP addresses from additional subnets can only be used on the host system or a single VM with a single IP (if the subnet is routed to it) (also applies to IPv6)

With a routed setup the `vmbr0` is not connected with the physical interface. IP forwarding needs to be activated on the host system. This can be done automatically through `/etc/sysctl.conf` at boot time. (Please note that forwarding is disabled for the default Hetzner installation. This setting can be found in either `/etc/sysctl.conf` or in `/etc/sysctl.d/99-hetzner.conf`)

`sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_forward=1`

Forwarding for IPv6 needs to be activated as well. This is also available in the Hetzner standard installation and only needs to be activated:

`sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1`

After a successful installation the virtual machines can be administered at `https://server-IP:8006`.

### Network Configuration Hostsystem Routed

When using a routed setup, it is necessary to manually add the route to a virtual machine. Additionally, existing virtual MAC addresses should be removed from the respective IP addresses. Since a host route is set, IP addresses from other subnets are easily possible. So for example:

```
# /etc/network/interfaces
### Hetzner Online GmbH - installimage
# Loopback device:
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

# device: enp1s0
auto enp1s0
iface enp1s0 inet static
  address <main IP>
  netmask 255.255.255.255
  pointopoint <gateway IP>
  gateway <gateway IP>

iface enp1s0 inet6 static
  address <address from the IPv6 subnet> #e.g. 2001:db8::2
  netmask 128
  gateway fe80::1
  up sysctl -p

# for single IPs
auto vmbr0
iface vmbr0 inet static
  address <main IP>
  netmask 255.255.255.255
  bridge_ports none
  bridge_stp off
  bridge_fd 0
  up ip route add <first additional IP>/32 dev vmbr0
  up ip route add <second additional IP>/32 dev vmbr0

iface vmbr0 inet6 static
  address <address from the IPv6 subnet>
  #e.g. 2001:db8::3, should not be the same as on eth0
  netmask 64
  up ip -6 route add 2001:db8::/64 dev vmbr0

# for an additional IPv4 subnet
auto vmbr1
iface vmbr1 inet static
  address <a usable subnet IP>
  netmask <netmask of the subnet>
  bridge_ports none
  bridge_stp off
  bridge_fd 0
```

### Network Configuration Guest Routed

The IP of the bridge in the host system is always used as gateway ie. the main IP for single IPs, the IP configured from the subnet in the host system for subnets.

```
# /etc/network/interfaces
### Example for single IPs from a different subnet
# Loopback device:
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

# device: ens18
auto ens18
iface ens18 inet static
  address <additional IP>
  netmask 255.255.255.255
  pointopoint <main IP>
  gateway <main IP>

iface ens18 inet6 static
  address <address from the IPv6 subnet> # e.g. 2001:db8::f001
  netmask 64
  gateway <IPv6 address vmbr0> # e.g. 2001:db8::3

# /etc/network/interfaces
### Example for a subnet
# Loopback device:
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

# device: ens18
auto  ens18
iface ens18 inet static
  address <a usable subnet IP>
  netmask <netmask of the subnet>
  gateway <IP from the subnet configured in the host system>

iface ens18 inet6 static
  address <address from the IPv6 subnet> # e.g. 2001:db8::f001
  netmask 64
  gateway <IPv6 address vmbr0> # e.g. 2001:db8::3
```

### Network Configuration Host Bridged

When using KVM in bridged mode it is ABSOLUTELY necessary to apply for virtual MAC addresses for the single IPs in advance. The configuration of subnets is analogous.

```
# /etc/network/interfaces
### Hetzner Online GmbH - installimage
# Loopback device:
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

auto vmbr0
iface vmbr0 inet static
  address <main IP>
  netmask 255.255.255.255
  pointopoint <gateway IP>
  gateway <gateway IP>
  bridge_ports eth0
  bridge_stp off
  bridge_fd 1
  bridge_hello 2
  bridge_maxage 12

# for a subnet
auto vmbr1
iface vmbr1 inet static
  address <a usable subnet IP>
  netmask <netmask of the subnet>
  bridge_ports none
  bridge_stp off
  bridge_fd 0
```

### Network Configuration Guest Bridged

The gateway for single IPs is the gateway of the host system or the assigned IP. For subnets, the configuration is identical to the routed setup.

```
# /etc/network/interfaces
# Loopback device:
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

# device: ens18
auto ens18
iface ens18 inet static
  address <additional IP>
  netmask 255.255.255.255
  pointopoint <gateway of the additional IP>
  gateway <gateway of the additional IP>
```

## Step 3 - Security

The web interface is protected by two different authentication methods: Proxmox VE standard authentication (Proxmox proprietary authentication) and Linux PAM standard authentication.

Nevertheless, additional protection measures would be recommended to protect against the exploitation of any security vulnerabilities or various other attacks.

Here are several possibilities:

* [Two-Factor-Authentication](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Two-Factor_Authentication)
* [Fail2ban against Bruteforce-Attacks](https://pve.proxmox.com/wiki/Fail2ban)
* [Securing the SSH Service](https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/securing-ssh)

## Conclusion

By now you should have installed and configured Proxmox as a virtualization platform on your server.
