---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/how-to-route-cloudserver-over-private-network-using-pfsense-and-hcnetworks"
slug: "how-to-route-cloudserver-over-private-network-using-pfsense-and-hcnetworks"
date: "2019-08-12"
title: "How to route cloud server over private network using pfSense and Hetzner Cloud Networks"
short_description: "This tutorial shows how to route cloud servers over private network using pfSense and Hetzner Cloud Networks"
tags: ["Hetzner Official", "Private Networking", "Hetzner Cloud", "hcloud", "networks", "pfsense"]
author: "Hetzner Online"
author_link: "https://github.com/hetzneronline"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/30047064"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-4"
cta: "cloud"
---

## Introduction

This tutorial explains how to route cloud servers over a private network using pfSense and "Hetzner Cloud Networks".

[hcloud-CLI](https://github.com/hetznercloud/cli) will be used in this tutorial. It can also be done with the [Cloud Console](https://console.hetzner.cloud/).

**Why should a server route the traffic over a private network?**<br>
The advantage to route the traffic over private networking is that the client servers can be protected by a firewall and are only accessible through the internal IP address. If the public interface of the client servers is disabled, the only access is via the router. It uses NAT (...) to hide the internal network from the public Internet.

------

**Prerequisites**

Following things are required:

- 2 cloud servers (one as pfSense, the other one as client)
- A private network range
- [hcloud-CLI](https://github.com/hetznercloud/cli)
- [Cloud Console](https://console.hetzner.cloud/)

**Example terminology**

- pfSense server: `router` / `10.0.0.2` 
- client server: `private-client`
- Hetzner Network: `nat-network` / `10.0.0.0/16`
- Hetzner subnet: `10.0.0.0/24`
- Hetzner gateway: `10.0.0.1`

> Please replace those example names and IPs with your own names and IPs in all example commands.

## Step 1 - Set up the environment

Before anything can be done, the router and the client have to be created. For this purpose, a CX11 as router is enough.

- **Create the servers**
  
  To create the servers, you have to execute the following commands (it does not matter which image you use on the router):
  
  ```bash
  hcloud server create --name router --type cx11 --image ubuntu-22.04
  hcloud server create --name private-client --type cx11 --image ubuntu-22.04
  ```
  
  When this is done, you can create the private network.


- **Create the private network**
  
  ```bash
  hcloud network create --name nat-network --ip-range 10.0.0.0/16
  ```
  
  The network needs a subnet. This tutorial will use the IP range `10.0.0.0/24` in zone `eu-central`, which includes `hel1`, `fsn1` and `nbg1`.
  
  ```bash
  hcloud network add-subnet nat-network --network-zone eu-central --type server --ip-range 10.0.0.0/24
  ```


- **Attach the servers to the network**
  
  You have to attach the servers to the network. You should specify the IP address of the router because the traffic will be routed over this server. **You cannot assign `10.0.0.1` because this IP is already used by the [Hetzner gateway](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/networks/faq#how-do-i-setup-my-own-router).**
  
  ```bash
  hcloud server attach-to-network router --network nat-network --ip 10.0.0.2
  hcloud server attach-to-network private-client --network nat-network
  ```


- **Add a route to the network**
  
  Traffic between servers within the same Hetzner Cloud Network is always routed via the Hetzner gateway. For more information on Hetzner Network gateways, see this [FAQ entry](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/networks/faq#how-do-i-setup-my-own-router).
  
  This means that traffic is **always** routed like this: `server-1`➔`gateway`➔`server-2`

  To achieve this, you need two routes:
  
  - A route that tells the private server (client) to forward traffic to the gateway (`10.0.0.1`)
  - A route that tells the gateway (`10.0.0.1`) to forward traffic to the pfSense server (`10.0.0.2`)
  
  In order to route public traffic from the server to the gateway, you have to add a route on the server itself. This is explained in [Step 3 - Set up the client server](#step-3---set-up-the-client-server).

  In order to route public traffic from the gateway to the pfSense server, you have to add a route to your Cloud Network. You can add the neccessary route with this command: 
  
  ```bash
  hcloud network add-route nat-network --destination 0.0.0.0/0 --gateway 10.0.0.2
  ```

  This route will tell the Hetzner gateway to forward the whole traffic `0.0.0.0/0` (every IP in every subnet) to your pfSense server `10.0.0.2`.

  <br>
  
  <blockquote>

  <details>

  <summary>Click here if you are using a dedicated server and vSwitch</summary>

  If you are using a dedicated server and vSwitch, make sure you configured the dedicated server correctly (see "[Configure networking on your dedicated root servers](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/networks/connect-dedi-vswitch#step-2-configure-networking-on-your-dedicated-root-servers)"). You can "Expose routes to vSwitch". As long as the routes are exposed to the vSwitch, they also become reachable for all dedicated servers that are assigned to the vSwitch.
  
  </details>

  </blockquote>

## Step 2 - Set up the pfSense server

- **Mount the pfSense image and restart the server**
  
  To install pfSense on the router server, mount the image first.
  
  ```bash
  hcloud server attach-iso router pfSense-CE-2.6.0-RELEASE-amd64.iso
  ```
  
  The ISO name depends on the version. It's possible that the ISO may be a newer version.
  
  When the ISO is mounted, a reboot/reset of the server is needed. To perform the installation, you need the [VNC console](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/getting-started/vnc-console).
  
  ```bash
  hcloud server reset router
  ```


- **Perform the installation**
  
  You can open the [VNC console](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/getting-started/vnc-console) in the [Cloud Console](https://console.hetzner.cloud/).
  
  Perform the installation with the guide.
  
  When the installation is done, you can detach the ISO.
  
  ```bash
  hcloud server detach-iso router
  ```

  You can now reboot the server.


- **After reboot, configure pfSense using the [VNC console](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/getting-started/vnc-console) in the [Cloud Console](https://console.hetzner.cloud/)**
  
  When pfSense is booted, there is a dialog if VLANs should be configured. Type in `n` and press enter.
  
  For the WAN interface use `vtnet0`. Leave LAN interface empty. LAN interface gets set up later.
  
  Confirm the changes with `y`, if WAN is `vtnet0`.

-----------
-----------

The router is now accessible in browser. Log in with the following user credentials:

> User name: `admin`<br>
> Password: `pfsense`

Follow the installation guide. In step 4, un-check the option `Block bogon networks`.

**Set up the interface and routing:**

- Go to `Interfaces ➔ Assignments`
  
  Add the interface `vtnet1`.

  Save the change.

  ------


- Then, go to `Interfaces ➔ LAN`

  Check `Enable interface` and set the `IPv4 Configuration Type` to `DHCP`.
  
  Save and <u>**do not**</u> apply the changes!

  ------


- Go to `System ➔ Routing ➔ Static Routes`
  
  Create a new route:
  
  ```
  Destination network: 10.0.0.0/16
  Gateway: 10.0.0.1
  Description: Make private network reachable for pfSense
  ```
  
  Save and apply the changes.

  ------


- Go back to `Interfaces ➔ LAN` and also apply the changes.
  
  ------


- Go to `System ➔ Advanced ➔ Networking` 
  
  Under `Network Interfaces`, enable `Disable hardware checksum offload` and click `Save`.

------


**Set up a firewall:**

- Go to `Firewall ➔ NAT ➔ Outbound`
  
  - Set the Outbound NAT Mode to `Hybrid Outbound NAT rule generation`.
  
  - Create the following mapping rule:
    
    ```
    Edit Advanced Outbound NAT Entry
      Interface: WAN
      Address Family: IPv4+IPv6
      Protocol: any
      Source: 10.0.0.0/16
      Destination: any
    Translation
      Address: Interface Address
    ```
    
  Save and <u>**do not**</u> apply the changes!

  ------


- Go to `Firewall ➔ Rules ➔ LAN`
  
  Edit the rule with description `Default allow LAN to any rule`.

  - Change the source from `LAN net` to `any`.
  
  Save and apply the changes.

  ------


- Go to `Firewall ➔ Rules ➔ WAN` and create a new rule.
  
  ```
  Action: Block
  Interface: WAN
  Address Family: IPv4+IPv6
  Protocol: TCP/UDP
  Source: any
  Destination: This firewall (self)
  Destination Port Range: From "HTTP (80)" to "HTTPS (443)"
  ```
  
  Save and apply the changes.

  ------


- Now go back to `Firewall ➔ NAT ➔ Outbound` and also apply the changes.

It may happen that the browser is caching the session.
In this case, close the browser and re-open it. The pfSense UI should no longer be reachable via the public IP address.

## Step 3 - Set up the client server

On the client, check its private networking interfaces. You can use the following command:

```bash
ip l
```

You should get an output like this:

```bash
root@private-client:~# ip l
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
2: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc fq_codel state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
3: ens10: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1450 qdisc fq_codel state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
```

The private network interface has the mtu `1450`. In this case, it is `ens10`.

If your servers also has a **public network**, you can optionally disable this public interface.

- **Optional step**
  
  To disable the public interface, you can choose from those two options:
  
  <br>
  
  <ul>
  <details>
  
  <summary>Change the "<a href="https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/overview/#network-options">network option</a>" of your server</summary>
  
  If your Cloud Server is attached to a **private** network, you can disable the **public** network.
  
  To disable the public network in the Cloud Console, you have to first switch off the server. Then, go to the "Networking" tab of your server and select "Disable public network". When you switch the server back on, it no longer has a public interface and it can't access the Internet anymore.
  
  -------
  
  </details>
  
  <details>
  
  <summary>Edit the file <code>/etc/network/interfaces</code></summary>
  
  If you don't want the server to be reachable via its public IP address, you have to comment out the line `source /etc/network/interfaces.d/*.cfg`.
  
  When this line is not commented out, `cloud-init` automatically configures the eth0 interface and saves the network configuration for the public interface in this directory.
  
  After the line is commented out, it should look like this:
  
  ```bash
  #source /etc/network/interfaces.d/*.cfg
  ```
  
  </details>
  </ul>

-------

#### Configure route for private networking

Edit the file `/etc/network/interfaces`:

- **Add a default route to the network gateway**
  
  Private networking by Hetzner Cloud works on Layer 3 so you need to add a default route to the **network gateway**. The network gateway will then forward the request to your pfSense server (`client`➔`gateway`➔`pfsense`) because of the network rule you added in step 1.
  
  Add the following configuration to `/etc/network/interfaces`:
  
  ```bash
  auto ens10
  iface ens10 inet dhcp
  	post-up ip route add default via 10.0.0.1
  ```
  
  > Replace `10.0.0.1` with the IP of your own Hetzner gateway. The gateway's IP address is always the first IP address of the network's IP range.

- **Add the DNS servers**

  Add the DNS servers by adding the line `dns-nameservers 185.12.64.2 185.12.64.1` to `/etc/network/interfaces` under the `post-up` line.
  
  If DNS is still not working, `systemd-resolved` ignores this parameter.
  
  In this case, you need to configure DNS in the file `/etc/systemd/resolved.conf`. There should be a line like `#DNS` under the line `[Resolve]`.
  Un-comment the `DNS` line by removing the `#` and type in some DNS servers or use the DNS servers by Hetzner:
  
  ```bash
  DNS=185.12.64.2 185.12.64.1
  ```

Save the file and restart the server.

If the public interface is disabled, you can no longer access the server via it's external IP.

You can login either via [SSH over the router server](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/getting-started/connecting-via-private-ip) or via the [VNC console](https://docs.hetzner.com/cloud/servers/getting-started/vnc-console).

Try to ping a domain (e.g. `fsn.icmp.hetzner.com`). If this works, use `mtr` to check the tracepath and see if the traffic is routed via the pfSense server.

The MTR should look like this (mtr to `fsn.icmp.hetzner.com` on `private-client`):

```bash
HOST: private-client              Loss%   Snt   Last   Avg  Best  Wrst StDev
  1.|-- _gateway                   0.0%     1    4.0   4.0   4.0   4.0   0.0
  2.|-- 10.0.0.2                   0.0%     1    1.0   1.0   1.0   1.0   0.0
  3.|-- 172.31.1.1                 0.0%     1    1.3   1.3   1.3   1.3   0.0
  4.|-- x.your-cloud.host          0.0%     1    0.2   0.2   0.2   0.2   0.0
  5.|-- static.1.97.69.159.client  0.0%     1   18.9  18.9  18.9  18.9   0.0
  6.|-- static.213-239-231-65.cli  0.0%     1    0.9   0.9   0.9   0.9   0.0
  7.|-- core21.fsn1.hetzner.com    0.0%     1    0.6   0.6   0.6   0.6   0.0
  8.|-- ex9k2.dc1.fsn1.hetzner.co  0.0%     1    0.4   0.4   0.4   0.4   0.0
  9.|-- fsn.icmp.hetzner.com       0.0%     1    0.5   0.5   0.5   0.5   0.0
```

## Conclusion

This article shows the steps necessary for setting up a pfSense server to route the traffic from other servers over pfSense.
