---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/tutorial-template"
slug: "tutorial-template"
date: "2021-01-01"
title: "Set Up your own Mail Server on Debian, Ubuntu or CentOS using iRedMail"
short_description: "Using this tutorial, you will learn how to fully set up your own, managed by you mail server on any Debian-Based on RHEL-Based Linux Server. "
tags: ["Administration", "Postfix", "Dovecot", "Mailserver"]
author: "Bruno Stelmaszyk"
author_link: "https://github.com/....."
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/....."
author_description: "Bechelor of IT, currently working as Google Cloud Administrator in Santander Group, previously Unix/AIX System Administrator at GSK. "
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-x"
cta: "product"
---

## Introduction

In this tutorial, I will show you how to set up fully-functional Mailserver with SSL Certificates and correct DNS Records which will tell all other mailservers, that your mailserver is not used for spam and is not used for Phishing purposes. 

This tutorial contains: 
* Linux Preparation
* IRedMail Setup
* SSL Setup using Certbot from Letsencrypt 
* Basic guide about administering IRedMail
* DNS Setup + additional security with SPF, DMARC and DKIM records

**Prerequisites**

* VPS or Dedicated Server with public IPv4, min. 4GB RAM with root access via SSH
* Debian-Based Distro (e.g. Debian 10, Ubuntu 18.04, 20.04) or RHEL-Based Distro (eg. Alma Linux, CentOS8, Fedora 32+)
* Your own domain (eg. example.com) and ability to add/modify DNS Records at your registrar or DNS Provider (eg. OVH, Cloudflare).


## Step 1 - Create new Server

* Head to [Hetzner Cloud Console](https://console.hetzner.cloud)
* Create a new project. Feel free to name it as you want
* Choose the closest to you location (or any other you prefer) for your server
* Choose the Operating System for your server. For the purpose of this Tutorial, I would suggest Debian 10 or CentOS. This tutorial covers both cases. 
* Choose the type of the server. Remember, that the required minimum of RAM is 4GB, so I would suggest at least CX11 or CPX11. 
* In point 9 (NAME), set the name to: `mail` or any other name. Note, that this name will be for your subdomain, for example `mail.example.com`.
* Create & Buy server

Also, to avoid rejecting your messages, a rDNS (Reverse DNS) record has to be created. The rDNS is the first evidence, that this mailserver belongs to you. 
Lucky you! Hetzner created the Reverse DNS entry during a VPS Setup, so there is nothing to do in here

## Step 2 - Introduction to mailserver setup and most important information before start.

Once the server is created and deployed, now it's time to start working on Mailserver creation. Make sure that you have about 2 hours free, because this setup may take up to 2 hours, and in case of any complications (I do not expect any, because I wrote it while creating on my VM), it may take a bit longer. 

IMPORTANT NOTE - as this Tutorial has been written for Debian and CentOS, some steps may differ. These steps will be marked as 'Debian step' or 'CentOS Step'.  

If you will be using Ubuntu 18.04 or 20.04 (or any other Ubuntu newer than 18.04), please follow procedure for Debian. In case of Fedora/Alma Linux, please follow CentOS Procedure. 

Steps which are applicable for BOTH, are not marked as these steps will work the same way on Debian and its derivatives, and also on CentOS and its derivatives. 

\
&nbsp;
### Step 2.1 - prepare your server, install updates and additional repositories etc.

This step is pretty short. In case of CentOS, we will also install EPEL Repository. EPEL Repository is Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux. This repository is already installed in Fedora!

To update & install repositories on CentOS, execute following commands: 
```bash
dnf update -y; dnf install epel-release -y; dnf update -y; dnf install tar -y
```
\
&nbsp;
To update Debian, execute following commands: 
```bash
apt update; apt upgrade -y; apt install tar -y
```

The commands below upgraded the Operating System on your Server and installed the newest security patches and applications. 
\
&nbsp;

### Step 2.2 - Download and prepare installer

iRedMail installation is pretty easy, as the iRedMail Team prepared the installer. This installer will ask you some simple questions, like about installing Nginx, OpenLDAP/MariaDB and some other stuff. Before we start installation, let me quickly explain how to move aroud the installer: this is a simple, command-line installer, where you can choose your options by: 
* Space --> tick/untick option
* Arrows --> navigate up/down and left/right
* Enter --> works like a left mouse button. 

Now, when this is clear, connect to your server through SSH and download the latest iRedMail release using `wget`. 
Make sure, wget is installed using command: `which wget`. You should see the output like this: `/usr/bin/wget`. If you will not get any output, simply install wget using commands: 

Debian: `apt install wget -y`

CentOS: `dnf install wget -y`

Now, once wget is installed, head to [https://www.iredmail.org/download.html](iRedMail download site), right-click on STABLE and copy the link to the clipboard. 

* Via SSH, execute the following command to download iRedMail package (at the time of writing, the newest stable version is 1.4.0): 
`wget https://github.com/iredmail/iRedMail/archive/1.4.0.tar.gz`

* Once this file has been downloaded, you need to uncompress it using command: 
`tar xf 1.4.0.tar.gz`

* List the current directory using: `ls`

* In the output, you should see the directory `iRedMail-1.4.0`. 

* Get into this directory using command: `cd iRedMail-1.4.0`. 

* If you will list the directory using `ls` command you will see the file called `iRedMail.sh`. This is the installer. 

* Make it executable using command: `chmod +x iRedMail.sh`

* Now the installer is ready to be executed, so let's proceed to installation.



### Step 2.3 - set up DNS Records and prepare environment
The DNS records we will set up in this step are A and MX.  
A: this record will point your mailserver domain to the IP Address of your VPS. For the purpose of this tutorial, let's assume, that our IP Address is `155.92.182.221` and our mailserver subdomain is `mail.example.com`. Now, add the A record to your domain using the schema below (if you are using Cloudflare, DO NOT PROXY THIS RECORD!): 

`Record Type: A`

`Name: mail.example.com`

`Target: 155.92.182.221`

`TTL: Automatic (or 3600)`
\
&nbsp;

Now, when the A record is created, let's create a MX record. MX record is required for mail delivery and allows administrator to assign other domain to the mailserver. 

Here, we will allow users from domain `example.com` to use `mail.example.com` mailserver, so it will be possible to send emails from `@example.com` domain, not only `mail.example.com`. Let's set them up as below: 

`Record Type: MX`

`Name: example.com`

`Content: mail.example.com`

`TTL: Auto (or 3600)`

`Priority: 1`
\
&nbsp;

Priority is very important if you have more than 1 mailserver. If you have 2 mailservers, you can set them up as main and secondary mailserver using higher and lower priorities. That means, that if you will have two mailservers, let's say mail1 (with priority 5) and mail2 (with priority 10), then the mailserver you will be working on is mail1. In case of mail1 failure, all mails will come to mail2 automatically. Summarizing, mailserver with lower priority is a main node, all others with higher priority are secondary nodes.


Now, let's prepare our Linux environment a bit. This preparation will set up the hostname and we will change entries in /etc/hosts file. 

Change the hostname so it will be the same as in the A record in DNS using command: 
`hostnamectl set-hostname mail.example.com`

Now, let's edit the /etc/hosts file using nano. If there is no nano installed, install it using commands: 
* Debian: `apt install nano -y`
* CentOS: `dnf install nano -y`

Now, as nano is installed, open the /etc/hosts file using command: `nano /etc/hosts`

And edit it to look like below: 

`127.0.0.1  localhost.localdomain   localhost`

`::1        localhost6.localdomain6 localhost`    - this line is applicable only if you are going to use IPv6

`155.92.182.221 mail.example.com    mail`     - this is the entry with your public IPv4. Make sure it's correct and full address is the same like in DNS



Now, when the configuration is completed, let's start with installation. Please follow these steps carefully: 
* SSH to your server and head into the directory where you unpacked iRedMail
* start the installation using command: `./iRedMail.sh`
* Navigate to `YES` and click enter
* Leave as it is or change the default storage path. Once it's done, navigate to `Next` and ENTER
* Nginx is ticked by default and I suggest to install it. If you don't want to install Nginx, navigate to `No web server` and click space. Then ENTER.
* Choose the backend to store emails. Let's use MariaDB. Navigate to MariaDB and click SPACE, then ENTER
* Set the password for root (I do not recommend using the same password for Unix root account) and ENTER
* Provide your first domain name. Because in DNS we set up `example.com`, put it in the textbox and ENTER to go next
* The postmaster account will be created. Postmaster is the superuser of iRedMail and this user gets all reports. Set up the password for postmaster and hit ENTER. Remember this password!
* Now, choose the software you want to install. I suggest to leave as it is by default. Netdata is very useful for resource monitoring, iRedAdmin is an admin console for iRedMail, Roundcube is a web client for iRedMail and Fail2Ban is a perfect solution to avoid attacks. Hit Next. 
* Now confirm the settings by clicking `y` and hit enter. The installation will start. It may take up to 10 minutes. 


Now, let's set up the SSL certificate for our mailserver. For this purpose we will use certbot and we will use a DNS Challenge to prove, that domain and server belong to us. 

NOTE: NOW THE SCENARIOS ARE DIFFERENT FOR DEBIAN AND CENTOS! Please choose the scenario carefully. 



### Debian way: 
* Install snapcraft repository using command: `apt install snapd -y`
* Update snapcraft repositories: `snap install core; snap refresh core`
* Install certbot from snapcraft repository: `snap install --classic certbot`
* Prepare command: `ln -s /snap/bin/certbot /usr/bin/certbot`
* Once certbot is installed, execute the following command to start SSL Certificate request (remember to edit the domain!). We will request SSL Certificate for example.com: 
`certbot certonly --standalone -d example.com --preferred-challenges dns --keep-until-expiring`
* Certbot will ask you some questions and in the final step, it will ask you to create a TXT Record like: 

```text
Record type: TXT
Name: _acme-challenge
Content: abcdefgHiJKL29
```

Publish such TXT DNS Record and wait about 15 minutes for DNS entry to propagate. After 15 minutes, click enter. If the challenge is successful, then SSL Certificate has been issued. In case of failure, you need to try again and wait a bit more time. 

The certificate has been issued in `/etc/letsencrypt/live/mail.example.com`, and you can see there 4 files, where only 2 will be useful for further configuration: 
* `fullchain.pem` - full certificate
* `privkey.pem` - Certificate private key

Now, we need to overwrite the default, self signed certificate: 
* `ln -sf /etc/letsencrypt/live/mail.example.com/fullchain.pem /etc/ssl/certs/iRedMail.crt`
* `ln -sf /etc/letsencrypt/live/mail.example.com/privkey.pem /etc/ssl/private/iRedMail.key`


Now reboot the server using command: `reboot` or `shutdown -r now`. The connection will drop and in the meantime, you can scroll through the CentOS way for next instructions


### CentOS way: 
* Install snapcraft repository using command: `dnf install snapd -y`
* Enable snapcraft using command: `systemctl enable --now snapd.socket`
* Enable "Classic" snapcraft support: `ln -s /var/lib/snapd/snap /snap`
* Update snapcraft repositories: `snap install core; snap refresh core`
* Install certbot from snapcraft repository: `snap install --classic certbot`
* Prepare command: `ln -s /snap/bin/certbot /usr/bin/certbot`
* Once certbot is installed, execute the following command to start SSL Certificate request (remember to edit the domain!). We will request SSL Certificate for example.com: 
`certbot certonly --standalone -d example.com --preferred-challenges dns --keep-until-expiring`
* Certbot will ask you some questions and in the final step, it will ask you to create a TXT Record like: 

```text
Record type: TXT
Name: _acme-challenge
Content: abcdefgHiJKL29
```

Publish such TXT DNS Record and wait about 15 minutes for DNS entry to propagate. After 15 minutes, click enter. If the challenge is successful, then SSL Certificate has been issued. In case of failure, you need to try again and wait a bit more time. 

The certificate has been issued in `/etc/letsencrypt/live/mail.example.com`, and you can see there 4 files, where only 2 will be useful for further configuration: 
* `fullchain.pem` - full certificate
* `privkey.pem` - Certificate private key

Now, we need to overwrite the default, self signed certificate: 
* `ln -sf /etc/letsencrypt/live/mail.example.com/fullchain.pem /etc/pki/tls/certs/iRedMail.crt`
* `ln -sf /etc/letsencrypt/live/mail.example.com/privkey.pem /etc/pki/tls/private/iRedMail.key`

Now reboot the server using command: `reboot` or `shutdown -r now`. The connection will drop and in the meantime, you can scroll through the CentOS way for next instructions
\
&nbsp;
### END OF DIFFERENT STEPS
During Server reboot, let's set up the DNS entries that will authorize mails from your server. 

\
&nbsp;
### SPF Record - first validation step
The first DNS Record we will set up is SPF (Sender Policy Framework). In this record, you specify which server is allowed to send emails from `example.com` and `mail.example.com` domain. In case if you will add any other domain, remember to add SPF record to that domain. 

Add below records to your DNS: 
```text
Type: TXT
name: mail.example.com
Content: v=spf1 a mx:mail.example.com ip4:155.92.182.221/32 ip6:2a0c:c132:2022:1314::1/64 ?all
``` 

```text
Type: TXT
name: example.com
Content: v=spf1 a mx:mail.example.com ip4:155.92.182.221/32 ip6:2a0c:c132:2022:1314::1/64 ?all
``` 
In the example below, if you are not using IPv6, you can skip `ip6` part. 
 \
&nbsp;
### DMARC Record - second validation step

 Now, let's set the DMARC record up. DMARC allows you to set security rules for mailserver. In this tutorial, we will use benign rules. DMARC records are very important as these are another method of mailserver authentication. 

 Now, we will add DMARC record, as on the example below: 

 ```text
Type: TXT
name: _dmarc.example.com
Content: v=DMARC1; p=none; rua=mailto:admin@example.com; fo=1
``` 

In example above, all DMARC reports will be sent to `admin@example.com`. It's a good practice to take a look at the reports sometimes as these can tell you, for example how many servers tried to send emails from spoofed e-mail address from your domain as phishing. 
\
&nbsp;

### DKIM as the last mailserver validation step

Now, once we have already created SPF and DMARC records, the last thing is to create DKIM - DomainKeys Identified Email. In case of DKIM, mailserver signs the message with its private key. The public key is published in DNS, so all messages sent from original mailserver are signed. Making it simpler - DKIM validates, that an organization (or private person, owner, user) has the right to send emails.

To work on DKIM, we will use Amavis. Amavis is an open-source content filter. It can for example detect spam, viruses, banned content, generate and verify DKIM records etc. Very useful tool

The procedure of creating DKIM record is much more complicated than creating SPF or DMARC
\
&nbsp;
Make a symbolic link of amavisd.conf file to /etc using command: 
### Debian: 
```text
ln -sf /etc/amavisd/conf.d/50-user/amavisd.conf /etc/amavisd.conf
```

### CentOS: 
```text
ln -sf /etc/amavisd/amavisd.conf /etc/amavisd.conf
```  
\
&nbsp;

Now, we will create 1024-bit key. It is not recommended to create 2048-bit or bigger keys, because some DNS providers have problems with support of bigger keys. To do so, execute commands below: 

### Debian way: 
```text
amavisd-new genrsa /var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem 1024
chown amavis:amavis /var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem
chmod 0400 /var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem
```
\
&nbsp;
### CentOS way: 
```text
amavisd genrsa /var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem 1024
chown amavis:amavis /var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem
chmod 0400 /var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem
```
\
&nbsp;
In the example above, you have created DKIM keys for `example.com` domain. If you will need to create keys for another domains, simply execute the same commands, with another domain/subdomain.


Now, once the keys are created, let's edit Amavis configuration files to comply with `example.com` domain. You can edit files, you have linked previously, so we will work on `/etc/amavisd.conf` file. Let's start working on that. 

Let's open the file using nano editor by command: `nano /etc/amavisd.conf`

By combination CTRL+W, find phrase: dkim_key and edit the line to look like below (remember about your domain): 
```text
dkim_key(‘example.com’, “dkim”, “/var/lib/dkim/example.com.pem”);
```

Now, in the same file, find the line starting with `@dkim_signature_options_bysender_map` and edit it to look like below (remember about your domain):
```text
@dkim_signature_options_bysender_maps = ( {
	“example.com” => { d => “example.com”, a => ‘rsa-sha256’, ttl => 10*24*3600 },
});
```

If you will want to add more domain, simply add another dkim_key line, and add another entry with your domain in dkim_signature...

\
&nbsp;

### Almost there!
* Now, let's restart Amavis using command: `systemctl restart amavisd`
* Take a look at the DKIM Key you will need to add into DNS. It will be built of few lines. Remember to split them into one line, otherwise it WILL NOT work!
* Debian: `amavisd-new showkeys`
* CentOS: `amavisd showkeys`
* Note down the key (for example in notepad) and remember to have it written in one line, without spaces or any white marks. DKIM key may contain special marks like "\, /, $, etc.". 
\
&nbsp;

Create another TXT record as in the example below: 
```text
Type: TXT
Name: dkim._domainkey.example.com
Content: v=DKIM1; p=pasteyourkeyhere
TTL: 3600
```

Now wait about 15-30 minutes for changes to propagate. You can check if the DKIM record has been published by any web DNS Lookup tool, or via command `dig txt _dmarc.domainkey.example.com +short`. To use dig, you may need to DNS tools: 

Debian: `apt install dnsutils -y`
CentOS: `dnf install bind-utils -y`

Once you will be sure, that DKIM Record has been published, execute the command below: 

Debian: `amavisd-new testkeys`
CentOS: `amavisd testkeys`
\
&nbsp;
The expected output is PASS. If the output is PASS, then the job is completed. 

## Step 3 - Send test emails

If everything went fine, if you will reach your webserver page, https://mail.example.com, you should see Roundcube login screen and valid SSL Certificate. 
Login to POSTMASTER account using password you created during the configuration and send test email to for example @gmail.com. Gmail is very strict about email authentication, so if the email will arrive correctly, this will mean, that mailserver has been correctly set up. 
\
&nbsp;
Once the mail has been delivered without any issues, visit Admin panel at https://mail.example.com/iredadmin/ and login to postmaster account. 
There you can create/manage users, manage their storage quota and do many other things. 



## Conclusion

I hope that this tutorial helped you to create your own mailserver on Hetzner Virtual or Dedicated Server. 
If you will want me to create such tutorial for OpenSUSE (because it is also available in Rescue OS), please create a request, so I will be able to write it the same way, I wrote that one. 
If you encounter any issues with any of the steps in this tutorial, do not hesitate to contact me by [email](mailto:bruno@stelmaszyk.dev?subject=Hetzner%20Community%20iRedMail%20Question)

##### License: MIT

<!--

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: Bruno Stelmaszyk, bruno@stelmaszyk.dev

-->
