---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/opnsense-as-gateway-for-private-network"
slug: "opnsense-as-gateway-for-private-network"
date: "2022-06-16"
title: "How to route cloud server in a private network through OPNsense to access the internet"
short_description: "This tutorial shows how to use OPNsense as a gateway for a privat networks"
tags: ["Private Networking", "Hetzner Cloud", "Networks", "OPNsense", "Gateway"]
author: "Paolo Compagnini"
author_link: "https://github.com/looserouting"
author_img: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/45362646"
author_description: "Nice guy"
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-4"
cta: "cloud"
---

## Introduction
This tutorial shows how to user OPNsense as a gateway in a private network in the Hetzner Cloud.
The OPNsense can then be used as firewall, vpn gateway, web proxy, etc to secure the network.

##Prerequisites
I assume that you are already familiar with OPNsense. 
You will need one project with the following things:
- 1 cloud server with OPNsense installed

   I will not explain how to install the OS and I will assume that it is already installed
- 1 cloud server which should be protected by OPNsense

   In my case it is a Windows Server. Again, I won't explain how to install the OS.
   **The standard network interface on this server was disabled.** I will not explain how to deactivate the interface
- 1 Network

Everything has to be in the same zone. We will choose eu-central in this tutorial.

## Set up the network 
To completely understand this tutorial you need to understand how networks in the Hetzner Cloud work. It's not a virtual layer 2 switch like you probably know from Hyper-V or VMware.

But first let us add a network by clicking on the create button in the network menu.

Name: `int1`
Zone: `eu-central`
IP range: `10.0.0.0` / `16`

It will automatically create a subnet 10.0.0.0/24. You can now add a ressoure (a server or a load balancer) to the sub net. In our case we want to connect our 2 cloud servers. An IP address will be asigned automatically. If you want to choose an IP address yourself make sure to mark the checkbox at the bottom. Since the first IP address in the range is reserved I decided give the opnsense server the address 10.0.0.254

What happen when we use dhcp to assign ip address?
Using `ipconfig` you will find out that the Windows server was assigned the IP address 10.0.0.2/32.
**Read carefully! It's /32.**
This is why the system needs extra routing rules to communicate with the network 10.0.0.0/16.

Now how does the routing table looks like?

Here the important parts:

Destination|Mask|Gateway|Interface
---|---|---|---
0.0.0.0|0.0.0.0|10.0.0.1|10.0.0.2
10.0.0.0|255.255.0.0|10.0.0.1|10.0.0.2
10.0.0.1|255.255.255.255|On-link|10.0.0.2
10.0.0.2|255.255.255.255|On-link|10.0.0.2

The second and the third rule makes sure we can communicate with the private network.
The first rule is the default gateway. If no more specific route for sending can be found, data is passed to the specified gateway based on this default route which is 10.0.0.1.

Now if you try to ping an ip address outside of your private network the icmp packet will be send to 10.0.0.1. But the virtualization host will not know how to route this packet. To fix this we have to add a route to the created network. Return to the Hetzner Cloud Console an click on the `int1` in the network menu. The click on *Routes -> Add Route*. Insert the following and add the route:

Destination: `0.0.0.0`/ `0`
Gateway: `10.0.0.254`

Now the virtualization host will send all the traffic for non local destinations to OPNsense.

Good Job so far!

## Configure OPNsense
I assume that OPNsense was just installed.
If not already done we need to configure the WAN and the LAN interface. After that we need to change some default settings.
Let's go!

### Configure interfaces
Both interfaces WAN and LAN can be configured using dhcp. Here are the steps how to configure the interfaces using the console.

#### Assign interfaces
After Login to the console press 1 and Enter
Do you want to configure LAGGs now? N
Do you want to configure VLANs now? N
Enter the WAN interface name or 'a' for auto-detection: vtnet0
Enter the LAN interface name or 'a' for auto-detection: vtnet1
Enter the Optional interface 1 name or 'a' for auto-detection: <ENTER>
Do you want to proceed? Y

#### Set interface IP address
Now press 2 to set the interface addresses.
choose the first interface
Configure IPv4 address LAN interface via DHCP? Y
Configure IPv6 address LAN interface via WAN tracking? N
Configure IPv6 address LAN interface via DHCP6? N
Enter the new LAN IPv6 address. Press <ENTER> for none: <ENTER>
Do you want to change the web GUI protocol from HTTPS to HTTP? N
Do you want to generate a new self-signed web GUI certificate? N
Restore web GUI access defaults? N

repeat this for the second interface

### Default LAN firewall rule
Log in to the WebUI. Go to *Firewall -> Rules -> LAN*.
You should see 2 rules. Just edit the IPv4-related rule and change Source to "Single host or Network" and enter 10.0.0.0/16.

This is neccessary since the local interface belongs to the network 10.0.0.254/**32**

### NAT (masquerade)
Per default OPNsense will mask traffic coming from the local net and going out over the WAN interface. We have to make sure that traffic from the whole network 10.0.0.0/16 will be masked and not just 10.0.0.254/32.
Go to *Firewall -> NAT -> Outbound* and change the mode to Hybrid or Manual. I prefer manual.
Add a rule with the following setiings:
Interface: WAN
Source address: single host or Network 10.0.0.0/24
Source Port: any
Destination address: any
Destination port: any
Translation target: WAN address

### Nameresolution (unbound)
Access to the nameserver (opensens uses unbound per default) is restricted. And guess what... access is allowed jsut for 10.0.0.254/32
Go to *Service -> Unbound DNS -> Access List* and add a rule to allow access for the network 10.0.0.0/16

## Conclusion

This article shows the necessary steps for using OPNsense server as a gateway for a private network.

