---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/jitsi-meet-on-debian-ubuntu"
slug: "jitsi-meet-on-debian-ubuntu"
date: "2020-05-12"
title: "Install Jitsi Meet on Debian/Ubuntu"
short_description: "Jitsi Meet is an open-source (Apache) WebRTC JavaScript application that uses Jitsi Videobridge to provide high quality, secure and scalable video conferences."
tags: ["Jitsi", "Meeting", "Conference", "Ubuntu", "Debian"]
author: "Noah Seefried"
author_link: "https://github.com/n-se"
author_img: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/34218225"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-4"
---

## Introduction

Jitsi Meet is an open-source (Apache) WebRTC JavaScript application that uses Jitsi Videobridge to provide high quality, secure and scalable video conferences.  It can be used as a replacement for proprietary services like Zoom, Whereby, Teams, Skype and many others.

You can try it out on [meet.jit.si](https://meet.jit.si/). There are more public instances available [in the jitsi-meet GitHub wiki](https://github.com/jitsi/jitsi-meet/wiki/Jitsi-Meet-Instances).

This tutorial should work with Debian 8 (Jessie) or later, and Ubuntu 14.04 or later. Of course it is recommended to use the latest available (LTS) version of either Debian or Ubuntu.

**Prerequisites**

* At least a  small virtual server, e.g. [Cloud Server CX11](https://www.hetzner.com/cloud#pricing), with a root shell
* Basic knowledge about linux

## Step 1 - Choose a domain and setup DNS

First of all you need to choose a domain. In this tutorial we will use `talk.example.com`.  In your DNS zone create two simple records:

```dns
talk.example.com. 14400 IN A    10.0.0.1
talk.example.com. 14400 IN AAAA 2001:db8:1234::1
```

## Step 2 - Add repository and install

Jitsi ships pre-built packages for jitsi-meet in its own repository. Since these packages are signed with their own key, we also need to add the GPG from Jitsi to our keyring.

```console
echo 'deb https://download.jitsi.org stable/' > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jitsi-stable.list
wget -qO - https://download.jitsi.org/jitsi-key.gpg.key | apt-key add -
```

Then update your package list:

`apt-get update`

Depending on how simple and minimal your operating system is, you may receive an error from this repository. You need an additional package to support https repositories. After that update your package list again:

```console
apt-get install apt-transport-https
apt-get update
```

## Step 3 - Configure the hostname (optional)

If this server is for jitsi-meet only, then you should set the hostname with `hostnamectl set-hostname talk`.  Also edit the hosts file under `/etc/hosts` and replace the default with the chosen FQDN, in this tutorial `talk.example.com`.

## Automatic Installation

Jitsi Meet can install and configure a webserver and certificates itself. If you do not have any existing setup on this machine yet, you can use these steps.  
Otherwise scroll down to the manual installation.

### Step 4 - Install Jitsi Meet

Perform the jitsi-meet installation:

`apt-get install jitsi-meet -y`

During the installation process you need to enter your chosen domain name (not the example talk.example.com!). It will be used to configure the virtual host.

### Step 5 - Register a certificate

Next we register Let's Encrypt certificates for TLS encryption.
Jitsi Meet also offers a script for this task. Simply run it:

`/usr/share/jitsi-meet/scripts/install-letsencrypt-cert.sh`

Continue now with Step 8 below.

## Manual Installation

These steps describe the manual installation process.

### Step 4 - Install a webserver

In case you already have a webserver installed you can skip this step. For performance reasons we install a webserver otherwise jitsi-meet will use a builtin java webserver called jetty.

`apt-get install nginx -y`

### Step 5 - Register a certificate

Next we register Let's Encrypt certificates for TLS encryption. ork with this script at the moment).

We will use [certbot](https://certbot.eff.org/) from [EFF](https://www.eff.org/) for the Let's Encrypt certificates.

```console
wget https://dl.eff.org/certbot-auto
wget -N https://dl.eff.org/certbot-auto.asc

apt-get install gnupg2 -y # needed to receive and validate the certificate

gpg2 --keyserver pool.sks-keyservers.net --recv-key A2CFB51FA275A7286234E7B24D17C995CD9775F2
gpg2 --trusted-key 4D17C995CD9775F2 --verify certbot-auto.asc certbot-auto
```

The last line should be the following: `gpg: Good signature from "Let's Encrypt Client Team <letsencrypt-client@eff.org>" [ultimate]`. If not, please check again if you have downloaded the correct key. Do *NOT* use the downloaded file if the signature is not valid.

Mark certbot executable and install it:

```console
chmod a+x ./certbot-auto
mv ./certbot-auto /usr/local/bin/certbot
```

Time to register your certificate (don't forget to replace the email and domain with your certificate):

`certbot certonly --nginx --rsa-key-size 4096 -m holu@example.com -d talk.example.com`

### Step 6 - Install Jitsi Meet

Finally we can install jitsi-meet on our server.

`apt-get install jitsi-meet -y`

During the installation process you need to enter your chosen domain name (not the example talk.example.com!) and select the option to generate a self-signed certificate.

We let the installer generate the certificate but won't use it.

### Step 7 - Modify shipped nginx configuration

The jitsi-meet package ships with an nginx configuration. It is located under `/etc/nginx/sites-available/talk.example.com.conf`.

What do we need to change? Please note that the steps below are only minimal required changes, you can tweak a lot more in this nginx configuration.

#### Step 7.1 SSL certificate

Remove the lines starting with ssl_certificate and ssl_certificate_key and add the following lines instead:

```nginx
ssl_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/talk.example.com/fullchain.pem;
ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/talk.example.com/privkey.pem;
ssl_trusted_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/talk.example.com/chain.pem;
```

#### Step 7.2 IPv6 Support (optional)

Depending on your operating system and the Jitsi Meet version you install, the shipped nginx configuration does not support IPv6. If your server does, you can add IPv6 support with the following:

First add `listen [::]:80;` below `listen 80;`.  
Then add `listen [::]:443 ssl;` below `listen 443 ssl;`.

#### Step 7.3 TLS configuration (optional)

If your operating system is a recent and up to date version you should also modify the TLS configuration.

Replace the line starting with `ssl_protocols` with

```nginx
ssl_protocols TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
```

### Step 8 - Additional configuration

Open `/etc/jitsi/meet/talk.example.com-config.js`:

Uncomment and change `// disableThirdPartyRequests: false` to `true`

You should add more than one STUN server under `stunServers:` in case one of them does not work.  There is a list available on [this GitHub gist](https://gist.github.com/mondain/b0ec1cf5f60ae726202e). I can recommend you to use the following:

```
{ urls: 'stun:stun.nextcloud.com:443' },
{ urls: 'stun:stun.stunprotocol.org:3478' },
{ urls: 'stun:meet-jit-si-turnrelay.jitsi.net:3478' }
```

Of course the best solution would be to [host your own STUN server](https://community.hetzner.com/tutorials/install-turn-stun-server-on-debian-ubuntu-with-coturn).

## Step 9 - Restart all services

Restart all services to be sure all configuration changes are applied:
`systemctl restart nginx.service jicofo.service jitsi-videobridge2.service`

In case you get an error during room creation, reboot your server and try again.

## Conclusion

We installed a privacy respecting, self-hosted video conferencing platform in a few simple steps. If everything went fine you can now visit the domain you setup and start your first meeting!

##### License: MIT

<!--

Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: Noah Seefried <dev@noah-seefried.de>

-->
