---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/how-to-install-git-on-ubuntu-18.04"
slug: "how-to-install-git-on-ubuntu-18.04"
date: "2019-08-10"
title: "How To Install Git on Ubuntu 18.04"
short_description: "This tutorial explains how to install git on Ubuntu 18.04"
tags: ["Linux", "Git", "Install", "Ubuntu"]
author: "Roland Balla"
author_link: "https://github.com/Tumite"
author_img: ""
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: ""
---

## Introduction

Version control systems are increasingly indispensable in modern software development as versioning allows you to keep track of your software at the source level. You can track changes, revert to previous stages, and branch to create alternate versions of files and directories.

One of the most popular version control systems currently available is Git. Many projects’ files are maintained in a Git repository, and sites like GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket help to facilitate software development project sharing and collaboration.

In this guide, we will demonstrate how to install and configure Git on an Ubuntu 18.04 server. We will cover how to install the software in two different ways, each of which have their own benefits depending on your specific needs.

**Prerequisites**

To follow along with this tutorial, you will need an Ubuntu 18.04 server with:

⋅⋅*a non-root user with sudo privileges

## Step 1.1 Installing Git with Default Packages

Ubuntu’s default repositories provide you with a fast method to install Git. Note that the version you install via these repositories may be older than the newest version currently available. 

First, use the apt package management tools to update your local package index. With the update complete, you can download and install Git:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install git
```

You can confirm that you have installed Git correctly by running the following command:

```bash
git --version
```

## Step 1.2 Installing Git from Source

A more flexible method of installing Git is to compile the software from source. This takes longer and will not be maintained through your package manager, but it will allow you to download the latest release and will give you some control over the options you include if you wish to customize.

Before you begin, you need to install the software that Git depends on.

```bash
sudo apt-get install make autoconf libcurl4-gnutls-dev gettext gcc zlib1g-dev unzip
```

After you have installed the necessary dependencies, you can go ahead and get the version of Git you want by visiting the [Git project’s mirror on GitHub](https://github.com/git/git), available via the following URL:

``
https://github.com/git/git
``

From here, be sure that you are on the `master` branch. Click on the Tags link and select your desired Git version.

Move into the `tmp` directory to download temporary files and you can use the `wget` command to install the copied zip file link. 

```bash
cd /tmp
wget -O git.zip https://github.com/git/git/archive/master.zip
```

Unzip the file that you downloaded and move into the resulting directory by typing:

```bash
unzip git.zip
cd git-*
```

Now, you can make the package and install it:

```bash
make configure
./configure --prefix=/usr --without-tcltk 
make all
sudo make install
```

To ensure that the install was successful, you can type `git --version` and you should receive relevant output that specifies the current installed version of Git.

## Step 1.3 Installing Git man Pages (Optional)


You can install git `man` pages by typing:

```bash
cd ..
git clone git://github.com/gitster/git-manpages.git
cd -
sudo make quick-install-man
```

## Step 2 Setting Up Git

Now that you have Git installed, you should configure it so that the generated commit messages will contain your correct information.

This can be achieved by using the git config command. Specifically, we need to provide our name and email address because Git embeds this information into each commit we do. We can go ahead and add this information by typing:

```
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "youremail@domain.com"
```

We can see all of the configuration items that have been set by typing:

```bash
git config --list
```

The information you enter is stored in your Git configuration file, which you can optionally edit by hand with a text editor like this:

```
nano ~/.gitconfig
```


## Conclusion

You should now have Git installed and ready to use on your system.

##### License: MIT

<!---

Contributors's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: Roland Balla <balla.roland96@gmail.com>

-->
