---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/how-to-install-r-on-debian-10"
slug: "how-to-install-r-on-debian-10"
date: "2019-08-09"
title: "How To Install R on Debian 10"
short_description: "This tutorial explains how to install the programming language R on Debian 10"
tags: ["Linux", "R", "Debian"]
author: "Roland Balla"
author_link: "https://github.com/Tumite"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/5360018?s=400&v=4"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: "header-4"
cta: "dedicated"
---

## Introduction

R is an open-source programming language, that is widely used for developing statistical software and for performing data analysis and visualization. R offers many user-generated packages for specific areas of study, which makes it applicable to many fields.

**Prerequisites**

To follow along with this tutorial, you will need a Debian 10 server with:

* at least 1GB of RAM
* a non-root user with sudo privileges

## Step 1 - Installing Dependencies

Because R is a fast-moving project, the latest stable version isn’t always available from Debian’s repositories, so we’ll need to add the external repository maintained by CRAN. In order to do this, we’ll need to install some dependencies for the Debian 10 cloud image.

To perform network operations that manage and download certificates, we need to install dirmngr so that we can add the external repository.

```bash
sudo apt install dirmngr --install-recommends
```

To add a PPA reference to Debian, we’ll need to use the `add-apt-repository` command. For installations where this command may not be available, you can add this utility to your system by installing `software-properties-common`:

```bash
sudo apt install software-properties-common
```

Finally, to ensure that we have HTTPS support for secure protocols, we’ll install the following tool:

```bash
sudo apt install apt-transport-https
```

With these dependencies in place, we’re ready to install R.

## Step 2 - Installing R

For the most recent version of R, we’ll be installing from the CRAN repositories.

Let’s first add the relevant GPG key.

```bash
sudo apt-key adv --keyserver keys.gnupg.net --recv-key 'E19F5F87128899B192B1A2C2AD5F960A256A04AF'
```

Once we have the trusted key, we can add the repository.

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository 'deb https://ftp.fau.de/cran/bin/linux/debian buster-cran35/'
```

Now, we’ll need to run an update after this in order to include package manifests from the new repository.

```bash
sudo apt update
```

Once this completes running and you’re returned to your prompt, we’re ready to install R with the following command.

```bash
sudo apt install r-base
```

If prompted to confirm installation, press y to continue.

As of the time of writing, the latest stable version of R from CRAN is 3.6.1, which is displayed when you start R.

Since we’re planning to install an example package for every user on the system, we’ll start R as root so that the libraries will be available to all users automatically. Alternatively, if you run the R command without sudo, a personal library can be set up for your user.

```bash
sudo -i R
```
This confirms that we’ve successfully installed R and entered its interactive shell.

## Step 3 - Installing Add-on Packages from CRAN

Part of R’s strength is its available abundance of add-on packages. For demonstration purposes, we’ll install `txtplot`, a library that outputs ASCII graphs that include scatterplot, line plot, density plot, acf and bar charts:

```
install.packages('txtplot')
```

When the installation is complete, we can load `txtplot`:
```
library('txtplot')
```

If there are no error messages, the library has successfully loaded. Let’s put it in action now with an example which demonstrates a basic plotting function with axis labels. The example data, supplied by R's `datasets` package, contains [the speed of cars and the distance required to stop based on data from the 1920s](https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/datasets/html/cars.html):

```
txtplot(cars[,1], cars[,2], xlab = 'speed', ylab = 'distance')
```

If you are interested to learn more about `txtplot`, use `help(txtplot)` from within the R interpreter.

Any precompiled package can be installed from CRAN with `install.packages()`. To learn more about what’s available, you can find a listing of official packages organized by name via the [Available CRAN Packages By Name list](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/available_packages_by_name.html).

To exit R, you can type `q()`. Unless you want to save the workspace image, you can press `n`.

## Conclusion

By following this tutorial you have successfully installed the programming language R on your server, and know how to install additional add-ons.

##### License: MIT

<!---

Contributors's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: Roland Balla <balla.roland96@gmail.com>

-->
