---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/securing-ssh"
slug: "securing-ssh"
date: "2019-04-30"
title: "Securing the SSH service"
short_description: "This article deals with the protection of the SSH service on Linux systems."
tags: ["SSH", "Linux", "OpenSSH"]
author: "Markus"
author_link: "https://github.com/BackInBash"
author_img: "https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/48181660"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["de", "en"]
header_img: "header-3"
---

## Introduction

This article deals with securing the SSH service on Linux systems.
The following points are explained in more detail:
+ Protection of the SSH service
+ certificate-based login
+ Two factor authentication

**Prerequisites**
+ SSH service based on OpenSSH
+ Traditional SSH

This tutorial explains how to edit `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`, which is used by traditional SSH.

If your system uses socket-based SSH (Ubuntu 22.10 and higher) and you still want to follow this tutorial, you will need to disable `ssh.socket` and manually enable `ssh.service`.

<blockquote>
<details>
<summary>Click here for commands to disable <kbd>ssh.socket</kbd> and enable <kbd>ssh.service</kbd></summary>

```bash
sudo systemctl stop ssh.socket
sudo systemctl disable ssh.socket

sudo systemctl enable ssh
sudo systemctl restart ssh
```

</details>
</blockquote>

### Check if your system uses traditional SSH or socket-based SSH

Run the following command and check the output:

```bash
sudo systemctl status ssh
```

* **Traditional SSH**

  The SSH service (`ssh.service`) is automatically started during system boot by systemd.
  ```shellsession
  holu@example-server:~# sudo systemctl status ssh
  ● ssh.service - OpenBSD Secure Shell server
       Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/ssh.service; enabled; preset: enabled)
       Active: active (running)
  ```
  In `Loaded:`, it will say "enabled". 

<br>

* **Socket-Based SSH**
  
  The SSH service (`ssh.service`) is started by `ssh.socket` when the first connection request comes in.
  ```shellsession
  holu@example-server:~# sudo systemctl status ssh
  ● ssh.service - OpenBSD Secure Shell server
       Loaded: loaded (/usr/lib/systemd/system/ssh.service; disabled; preset: enabled)
       Active: active (running)
  TriggeredBy: ● ssh.socket
  ```
  In `Loaded:`, it will say "disabled", and the output will also include the line triggered by `ssh.socket`. 

## Step 1 - Securing the SSH service

This is mainly about customizing the OpenSSH configuration.
All subsequent changes in the SSH configuration file refer to the following file: `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`

### Step 1.1 - Deactivate the root login

Before turning off the root login, you should create an administrative user with which it is possible to gain root privileges.

To create such a user, it is necessary to execute the following commands on the system.
```bash
useradd -m -U -s /bin/bash -G sudo holu
passwd holu
```

Now the root login can be deactivated.
Therefore the line `PermitRootLogin` in the SSH configuration file must be changed as follows:

```bash
PermitRootLogin no
```

### Step 1.2 - Automatic session timeout

With this setting, a forced disconnection of the SSH connection is performed after a certain inactivity.
The following settings are necessary in the SSH configuration file:

```bash
ClientAliveInterval 300
ClientAliveCountMax 1
```

`ClientAliveInterval` defines the maximum time the session can be inactive before it terminates. In this case, 300 seconds is 5 minutes. `ClientAliveCountMax` defines the number of checks to be performed before a disconnect.

### Step 1.3 - Enable user for SSH

With this setting, only selected users are allowed to establish an SSH connection to the server.
The following settings are required in the SSH configuration file:

```bash
AllowUsers holu holu2
```

### Step 1.4 - Change default port for SSH

This setting changes the SSH port from 22.

**Advantages**: Bots and scanners scanning for SSH services on port 22 will not find the server and will not launch automated attacks against the server.

**Disadvantages**: The modified SSH port must be specified for each connection. 
Here you have the possibility to save the SSH connection. On Windows, for example with PuTTY, this is done via the interface. 
On Linux clients, the file `~/.ssh/config` with the following content must be created.
```bash
Host <your_host>
    HostName <your_host>
    Port SELECTED_PORT
```
(Optional) The key can also be stored here later: `IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa`.

**Warning**: ** By changing the SSH port, it may be necessary to change the firewall settings. This should be checked first.

To apply the setting, the following changes must be made to the SSH configuration file:
For security reasons it is recommended to select a port below 1024.
```bash
Port SELECTED_PORT
```

### Step 1.5 - Automatic disconnection in case of incorrect login

After the specified number of failed login attempts, the SSH connection is automatically disconnected from the server.
To apply the setting, the following changes are necessary in the SSH configuration file:
```bash
MaxAuthTries 2
```
### Step 1.6 - Deactivate unused functions

To prevent unused functions from being exploited, they should be switched off.
To apply the setting, the following changes in the SSH configuration file are necessary:
```bash
AllowTcpForwarding no                   # Disables port forwarding.
X11Forwarding no                        # Disables remote GUI view.
AllowAgentForwarding no                 # Disables the forwarding of the SSH login.
AuthorizedKeysFile .ssh/authorized_keys # The ".ssh/authorized_keys2" file should be removed.
```

### Step 1.7 - Apply the settings

To activate the settings, it is necessary to restart the SSH service.
Before you do this you should check the configuration for errors, this is done with this command:
```bash
sshd -t
```

If no errors were detected when checking the configuration, the SSH service can be restarted with the following command:
```bash
systemctl restart sshd
```

## Step 2 - Setup of Fail2Ban

This software offers protection against so-called Brute force attacks.

The IP address of the user is blocked for a certain period of time after several incorrect passwords have been entered. This is to prevent the attacker from trying out a large password list in a short time.

To install Fail2Ban the following steps are necessary.
Installing the software:
+ Ubuntu / Debian
   ```bash
   apt install fail2ban
   systemctl enable fail2ban
   ```
+ CentOS / RedHat
   ```bash
   yum install epel-release
   yum install fail2ban
   systemctl enable fail2ban
   ```
+ ArchLinux
   ```bash
   pacman -S fail2ban
   systemctl enable fail2ban
   ```
+ OpenSUSE / SLES
   ```bash
   zypper install fail2ban
   systemctl enable fail2ban
   ```
+ Fedora
   ```bash
   dnf install fail2ban
   systemctl enable fail2ban
   ```

Customizing the Fail2Ban configuration

Create the configuration using a template:
```bash
cp /etc/fail2ban/jail.conf /etc/fail2ban/jail.local
```
In the file `/etc/fail2ban/jail.local` the following changes must be made:

In the `[sshd]` tab, `enable` must be set to `true` and the possibly changed SSH port must be specified.

```bash
enabled = true
port = SELECTED_SSH_PORT
```

Optionally, the values for:
+ `bantime` (The time in which no further logins are possible.)
+ `findtime` (The time in which the incorrect login attempts are to be counted. Starts from the first failed login.)
+ `maxretry` (The maximum possible number of failed attempts before a lock occurs.)

can be changed.

The following command is to adopt the changed configuration for this:
```bash
systemctl restart fail2ban
```

## Step 3 - Certificate based authentication

This allows the user to log on to the server without a login password; only the password is required to protect the private key.

### On the Client

+ Create the SSH key pair

   __Linux / MacOS__

   Create an SSH key pair with a bit length of `4096`.
   ```bash
   ssh-keygen -b 4096
   ```
   Attention: For security reasons it is recommended to protect the key with a passphrase. This means that the key is not available in plain text, but is AES-CBC encrypted.

   __Windows__

   To generate an SSH key pair on Windows systems, either the WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) or the software [PuTTYgen](https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/latest.html) can be used.
+ Transfer the public SSH key to the server

   __Linux / MacOS__

   To transfer the public key to the server, the first step is to use the SSH connection using password authentication. The ssh-copy-id tool copies the corresponding identity file to the server:
   ```bash
   ssh-copy-id -i .ssh/id_rsa.pub -p <your_port> holu@<your_host>
   ```

   __Windows__
   
   On Windows systems, this step is done manually by copying the contents of the public key to the `/home/holu/.ssh/authorized_keys` file on the server. It is also possible that this file must be created first.

Testing the SSH connection with certificate-based authentication:
```bash
ssh -i .ssh/id_rsa -p <your_port> holu@<your_host>
```

### On the Server

**Note:** After changing the following keywords to "no", it is no longer possible to log in with a password via SSH.

| Keyword                                 | Description                      |
| --------------------------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| <kbd>PasswordAuthentication</kbd>       | Specifies whether password authentication is allowed. |
| <kbd>KbdInteractiveAuthentication</kbd> | Specifies whether to allow keyboard-interactive authentication. |

> <small>"ChallengeResponseAuthentication" is a deprecated alias for "KbdInteractiveAuthentication".</small>

<br>

If you wanted to disable all types of password authentication, you would need to set both keywords to "no". However, the next step explains how to setup two factor authentication and for this to work, you need `ChallengeResponseAuthentication`, or on new systems `KbdInteractiveAuthentication`, set to "yes".

---------------

You can now edit the SSH configuration file under `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`. 

* **Disable password authentication**<br>
  To disable basic password authentication, the configuration needs to look like this:
  ```bash
  PasswordAuthentication no
  ```
  > If you do **not** want to setup two factor authentication and you want to disable all types of password authentication, you can also set `KbdInteractiveAuthentication` to "no" (in older systems `ChallengeResponseAuthentication`).
  
  It is also possible to disable password authentication for a specific user.
  The entry for the SSH configuration file looks like this:
  ```bash
  Match User holu
      PasswordAuthentication no
  ```

<br>

* **Enable public key authentication**<br>
  You should double-check if `PubkeyAuthentication` is set to "yes" and make sure it is not commented out.
  ```bash
  PubkeyAuthentication yes
  ```

<br>

* **Adopt the changes**<br>
  To activate the settings, it is necessary to restart the SSH service.
  Before you do this you should check the configuration for errors, this is done with this command:
  ```bash
  sshd -t
  ```
  If no errors were detected when checking the configuration, the SSH service can be restarted with the following command:
  ```bash
  systemctl restart sshd
  ```

<br>

* **Check /etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/**<br>
  In order to prevent your configuration from being overridden, you should check all files in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/`.
  Files in this directory are commonly included in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` via an "Include" directive. This causes all settings in `sshd_config` to be overridden.
  In some instances, there are already files present in this directory, and if these contain settings like:
  ```bash
  PasswordAuthentication yes
  ```
  This will cause your changes and preferences to become ineffective.
  You should therefore consider changing or removing files in the `/etc/ssh/sshd_config.d/` directory. Alternatively, you can also remove the `Include` directive in the `/etc/ssh/sshd_config/` file.
  In addition you should also check this file for any other included files and consider removing or adjusting settings according to your preferred security standards.

<br>

## Step 4 - Two factor authentication

After a successful login, a one-time password is required before the login process is finished. This is done via the Google Authenticator.

>  ***Notice:*** To create the time-based one-time password (TOTP) a smartphone with one of the listed apps is required.
> + [Google Authenticator](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.apps.authenticator2)
> + [Aegis](https://github.com/beemdevelopment/Aegis/releases)

### Installing the Google Authenticator

+ Ubuntu / Debian
   ```bash
   apt install libpam-google-authenticator
   ```
+ CentOS / RedHat
   ```bash
   yum install epel-release
   yum install google-authenticator
   ```
+ ArchLinux
   ```bash
   pacman -S libpam-google-authenticator
   ```
+ openSUSE / SLES
   ```bash
   zypper install google-authenticator-libpam
   ```
   
### Configuration of the Google Authenticator

After the PAM module has been installed, it can be initialized and configured as shown below.

Starting the Google Authenticator:
```bash
google-authenticator
```

1. `Do you want authentication tokens to be time-based (y/n)`
`y`, it creates TOTP tokens (time-based one-time passwords) `n`, it creates HOTP tokens (counter-based one-time passwords)

1. a QR code is now displayed on the SSH console
Scan this code with a compatible app on your smartphone.

1. copy and store the keys listed below securely.
With the emergency scratch codes you can log in without OTP.
Update the file .google_authenticator with this information.
Type `y`.

1. confirm all other questions with `y`, or with `n` if you want different settings.

### Integration into the SSH logon

The Google Authenticator PAM module is configured ready, now services like the SSH daemon can be customized to allow 2-factor authentication over it.

+ Adjustments in `/etc/pam.d/sshd`

   Here the time `@include common-auth` must be commented out with a `#` at the beginning of the line.
   Then the line `auth required pam_google_authenticator.so` is inserted.

+ Adaptations in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`
   
   In the configuration file the `ChallengeResponseAuthentication` can now be set to `yes`.
   ```bash
   ChallengeResponseAuthentication yes
   ```
   Ubuntu 22.04 and newer versions need to adjust this flag instead:
   ```bash
   KbdInteractiveAuthentication yes
   ```
   
   Also the entries `UsePAM` and `AuthenticationMethods` should be checked. The entry `UsePAM` should be set to `yes` and `AuthenticationMethods` should look like this:
   ```bash
   AuthenticationMethods publickey,keyboard-interactive
   ```
+ Restart the SSH service
   ```bash
   systemctl restart sshd
   ```
After that the setup of the Two Factor Authentication is complete.

## Conclusion

This article describes several ways to secure the SSH service on Linux systems.

##### License: MIT

<!---

Contributors's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have
    the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my
    knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the
    right under that license to submit that work with modifications,
    whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license
    (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as
    indicated in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person
    who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are
    public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal
    information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained
    indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project
    or the license(s) involved.

Signed-off-by: Markus markus@omg-network.de

-->
